clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology 27 (Supplement 5): v69–v82, 2016
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw025
Published online 7 April 2016

Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in adult patients: ESMO
Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment
and follow-up†
D. Hoelzer1, R. Bassan2, H. Dombret3, A. Fielding4, J. M. Ribera5 & C. Buske6 on behalf of the
ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1

ONKOLOGIKUM Frankfurt am Museumsufer, Frankfurt, Germany; 2Hematology Unit, Ospedale dell’Angelo e Ospedale SS. Giovanni e Paolo, Mestre-Venezia, Italy;
Institut Universitaire d‘Hematologie Hopital St Louis, Paris, France; 4Cancer Institute, University College London, London, UK; 5Department of Clinical Hematology,
ICO-Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Jose Carreras Research Institute, Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 6CCC Ulm, Institut für Experimentelle
Tumorforschung, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Ulm, Germany
3

incidence and epidemiology

• distinguish B-cell precursor (BCP) ALL from T-cell ALL (T-

The estimated overall incidence of acute lymphoblastic leukaemia
(ALL) and lymphoblastic lymphoma in Europe is 1.28 per 100 000
individuals annually, with signiﬁcant age-related variations (0.53 at
45–54 years, ∼1.0 at 55–74 years and 1.45 at 75–99 years) and that
of Burkitt leukaemia/lymphoma is between 0.17 and 0.33 in the
same age groups [1]. These ﬁgures qualify ALL as a rare disease in
adults, making assessment and care at qualiﬁed centres highly desirable. Predisposing risk factors for adult ALL are not known, contrary to childhood ALL [2]. Therapeutic progress is undeniable as
shown by large registry data. In Europe, 5-year overall survival
(OS) improved from 29.8% in the years 1997–1999 to 41.1% in
2006–2008 (P < 0.0001), still as a function of age. Compared with
the reference group (age 15–54 years: OS >50%), OS was <30% in
the 55–64 years age group (hazard ratio 2.05) and <20% in the
≥65 years age group (hazard ratios 2.71 and 3.75) [3].

• distinguish Burkitt leukaemia (B-ALL) from BCP-ALL (differ-

diagnosis and pathology/molecular
biology
A comprehensive diagnostic approach requires the study of cell
morphology, immunophenotype, genetics/cytogenetics and
genomics, as detailed in the 2008 World Health Organization
(WHO) classiﬁcation [4] and recently reviewed [I, A] [5, 6].

morphology/immunophenotype/molecular
screening
The initial diagnostic work-up (Table 1) must be carried out
expeditiously and before any chemotherapy (within 1–2
working days) to:

• conﬁrm ALL diagnosis,
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via L. Taddei 4,
CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org

ALL),

ent treatment required),

ALL from Ph-negative (Ph−) ALL (different treatment
required), and
• shorten time to treatment start.
Aspiration of bone marrow is a standard procedure, with a core
marrow biopsy being necessary only in case of insufﬁcient cell
yield. The bone marrow must contain at least 20% blast cells, as
a criterion to differentiate ALL from lymphoblastic lymphoma
with/without marrow involvement, even if therapeutic consequences are very limited. The proportion of circulating blasts is
highly variable. ALL blasts are atypical lymphoid or undifferentiated cells. Once minimally differentiated acute myelogenous
leukaemia (AML) has been ruled out, the morphological analysis is uninformative in ALL, if not for the common association
between FAB L3 morphology and B-ALL [7]. The immunophenotype study plays the key diagnostic role, demonstrating commitment of the blast cell population to the B- or T-cell lineage.
The European Group for the Immunological Characterization
of Leukemias (EGIL) recognised distinct BCP/T-ALL subsets,
providing a rational immunological classiﬁcation along with criteria for differential diagnosis [8]. Original EGIL standards and
deﬁnitions of mixed-lineage leukaemias (MLLs) variously expressing B-, T- and myeloid-associated antigens were updated and
improved [9, 10]. Further indications on how to best perform diagnostic ﬂow cytometry were presented by a panel of experts [11].
The early diagnostic step is completed by a rapid molecular screening by means of reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) or ﬂuorescence in situ hybridisation (FISH) assays primarily for the detection of BCR-ABL1 gene rearrangements, denoting an underlying t(9;22)(q34;q11)/BCR-ABL1 chromosomal
translocation typical of Ph+ ALL and sensitive to targeted therapy
with tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) [I, A] [12].

†

Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: February 2016.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

clinical practice
guidelines

• distinguish Philadelphia (Ph) chromosome-positive (Ph+)

clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology

Table 1. Diagnostic work-up in adult ALL
Diagnostic step

Results/ALL subsets

Recommendations

– Lymphoid/undifferentiated blasts
(≥20% bone marrow involvement)
– FAB L3 morphology in Burkitt leukaemia
– CNS involvement

Mandatory

– MPO negative; B/T markers >20%
(CD3, CD79a >10%)
– B-lineage ALL:
Pro-B/B-I (CD19/CD79a/cCD22+)
Common/B-II (CD10+/cIgM−)
Pre-B/B-III (cIgM+/sIg−)
Mature-B/B-IV (sIg+)

Mandatory

– T-lineage ALL:
Pro-T/T-I (cCD3/CD7+)
Pre-T/T-II (CD2/CD5)
Cortical-T/T-III (CD1a+)
Mature-T/T-IV (CD3+/CD1a−)

Mandatory

– ALL with adverse clinico-biological features:
Ph+ ALL (rapid detection, to TKI therapy)
t(4;11)+ ALL
t(1;19)+ ALL
other high-risk cytogenetics

Mandatory

– ALL with adverse clinico-biological features:
Ph-like ALL
ETP ALL
NOTCH1/FBW7-unmutated/RAS/
PTEN-altered T-ALL
IKZF1, CLRF2, MLL, TP53, CREBBP,
RAS alterations

Recommended for
new clinical trials

MRD study
– MRD marker(s): LAIP (immunophenotype)/molecular probe (PCR)

– MRD-based risk classification

Mandatory

Storage of diagnostic material
– Cell banking/storage of DNA/RNA/protein lysates

– Additional/future studies

Highly recommended

HLA typing
– Patient/siblings

– Early application of SCT if required

Recommended

Morphology
– Bone marrow and peripheral blood
– Cerebro-spinal fluid

Immunophenotype
– MPO (differential diagnosis versus AML)
– B-lineage markers: CD19, CD79a, cCD22 (at least 2); others: TdT, CD10,
CD20, CD24, cIgM, sIg (kappa or lambda)
– T-lineage markers: cCD3; others: TdT, CD1a, CD2, CD5, CD7 CD4,
CD8, TCR α/β or γ/δ
– Stem/myeloid cell markers (variable): CD34, CD13, CD33, CD117

Cytogenetics/genetics
– Cytogenetics/FISH/RT-PCR

– CGH/SNP/GEP/NGS

Recommended
Mandatory

Mandatory

ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; CNS, central nervous system; MPO, myeloperoxidase; AML, acute myelogenous leukaemia; c, cytoplasmic; IgM,
immunoglobulin M; s, surface; Ig, immunoglobulin; FISH, fluorescence in situ hybridisation; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction;
Ph+, Philadelphia-positive; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor; CGH, comparative genomic hybridisation; SNP, single nucleotide polymorphism; GEP, gene
expression profiling; NGS, next-generation sequencing; Ph, Philadelphia; ETP, early T-cell precursor; T-ALL, T-cell ALL; MRD, minimal residual disease;
LAIP, leukaemia-associated immunophenotype; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; HLA, human leucocyte antigen; SCT, stem-cell transplantation.

cytogenetics/genetics
Results from cytogenetics, genetics and genomics are available at
a later stage, allowing the recognition of several ALL syndromes
with prognostic and/or therapeutic implications (reviewed in
references [2] and [6]). Standard cytogenetics/FISH and especially RT-PCR are routinely performed to obtain a rapid diagnosis of
Ph+ ALL and identify other intermediate/high- and high-risk
karyotypes/gene rearrangements, mainly:

v | Hoelzer et al.

• t(4;11)(q21;q23)/MLL-AFA4,

abn11q23/MLL, t(1;19)(q23;
p13)/PBX-E2A, t(8;14) or other abn14q32 in non-Burkitt ALL,
• del(6q), del(7p), del(17p), −7, +8, low hypodiploidy, i.e.
with 30–39 chromosomes/near triploidy with 60–78 chromosomes,
• complex (≥5 unrelated clonal abnormalities), and
• T-ALL lacking NOTCH1/FBXW7 mutations and/or with
RAS/PTEN abnormalities [I, A] [13–17].

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology

The more prognostically favourable cytogenetic/genetic subsets
are t(12;21)( p13;q22)/TEL-AML1 + ALL (rare in adults) and
hyperdiploid ALL, and NOTCH-1/FBXW7-mutated T-ALL.

new genetics/genomics
The integration of above studies with new genetics/genomics, i.e.
array-comparative genomic hybridisation, gene expression proﬁling,
single-nucleotide polymorphism array analysis and next-generation
sequencing, led to the recognition of highly speciﬁc poor-risk conditions, whose global incidence is ∼30%. These are: Ph-like ALL,
characterised by a gene expression proﬁle similar to Ph+ ALL and
associated with IKZF1 deletion, CLRF2 overexpression and tyrosine
kinase-activating rearrangements involving ABL1, JAK2, PDGFRB
and several other genes [16]; and early T-cell precursor (ETP) ALL,
characterised by lack of CD1a and CD8, weak CD5 expression, at
least one myeloid/stem cell marker, a speciﬁc transcriptional proﬁle
and the possible involvement of several critical genes [18]. Other
genetic aberrations that impart an inferior outlook are other MLL
gene rearrangements, TP53 and CREBBP mutations, and deregulation of RAS signalling components (NRAS, KRAS, FLT3, NF1).
Although these assays are still investigational and not regularly
carried out in the clinical practice, they are recommended for new
clinical trials to improve the risk classiﬁcation and support targeted
therapies [III, B].
other. The diagnostic phase is completed by the search for a
sensitive molecular marker or an aberrant leukaemia-associated
immunophenotype (LAIP) for the detection and monitoring of
minimal residual disease (MRD) [III, B] [19]. Human leucocyte
antigen (HLA) typing of patients and relatives is recommended
at this stage, to facilitate subsequent application of an early
stem-cell transplantation (SCT), according to study/treatment
indications [V, B].

risk assessment and prognostic factors
While the suggested diagnostic work-up permits the identiﬁcation of some high-risk (HR) subsets, clinical risk groups are
further deﬁned by several disease-related factors and some host-related factors [20, 21], and the individual prognosis is highly
reﬁned by ALL response dynamics (Table 2). Patients presenting
with no risk factors are deﬁned as standard risk (SR). Older age,
reduced tolerability to treatments and higher white blood cell
(WBC) count on presentation (reﬂecting higher tumoural
burden) are universally recognised as independent risk variables
predicting for lower complete remission (CR) rate and shorter
CR duration. The kinetics of response to early treatment steps is
also well recognised and increasingly sought-for prognostic information. This can be obtained through different methodologies and at different treatment times, ranging from pre-phase
therapy ( prednisone response) to induction day 8–15 (marrow
blast cell clearance), end of induction (time to CR, MRD) and
post-induction phase (MRD) [III, A].

minimal residual disease
Quantiﬁcation of MRD is a major and well-established risk factor
and should be obtained whenever possible for all patients also
outside of clinical trials. Methods for MRD evaluation and standardisation of MRD quantifıcation have been intensively described
[22–24]. Molecular response can be evaluated only for patients in
complete cytologic remission (Table 3), with one marker or more
for MRD analysis and samples available at the respective time
points. Deﬁnition of responses are summarised in Table 3. If
MRD is measured by ﬂow cytometry, a good MRD response is
often defıned as less than 10−3, although MRD levels less than
10−4 can be achieved with the 8–12 colour ﬂow cytometers.
Achievement of complete molecular remission (molCR)/
molecular remission is the most relevant independent prognostic factor for disease-free survival (DFS) and OS. Patients with

Table 2. High-risk factors in adult ALL
Risk factors

Risk subsets (notes)

Recommendations

Patient-related
– Age (years)
– Performance status (ECOG score)

– >40/55/65
– >1

Mandatory
Highly recommended

Disease-related
– WBC (×109/l)
– Immunophenotype (B-T-subsets)
– Cytogenetics (karyotype)
– Genetics

–
–
–
–

– Miscellaneous

>30 (B-lineage)/>100 (T-lineage)
Pro-B/early and mature-T
Ph+/t(4;11)+/other adverse
BCR-ABL1+/MLL+/PBX-E2A+/
Ph-like/IKZF1del/ETP/unmutated NOTCH1
– Central nervous system involvement

Mandatory
Mandatory
Mandatory
Mandatory
Recommended for new clinical trials
Mandatory

Response dynamics
– corticosteroid sensitivity (blast count after pre-phase)
– early blast cell response (BM morphology)
– time to CR (no. of courses)
– MRD (molecular/LAIP)

–
–
–
–

Recommended
Recommended
Mandatory
Mandatory

Poor prednisone response (≥1 × 109/l)
Day 8–15 blasts ≥5%
>1 cycle (late CR)
MRD+ (post-induction)

ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; ECOG, Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; WBC, white blood cells; Ph+, Philadelphia-positive; Ph, Philadelphia;
ETP, early T-cell precursor; BM, bone marrow; CR, complete remission; MRD, minimal residual disease; LAIP, leukaemia-associated immunophenotype.

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw025 | v

clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology

Table 3. Response parameters according to MRD
Terminology

Definitions

CR (complete haematological remission)

– Leukaemic cells not detectable by light microscopy in BM/PB/CSF (BM < 5% blasts)

MolCR (complete molecular remission/MRD negativity)

– Patient in CR
– MRD not detectable by sensitive molecular probe(s) (sensitivity ≥10−4)

MolR (molecular/MRD response, less than molCR)

– Patient in CR, not in molCR
– Low-level non-quantifiable MRD (<10−4/0.01%, i.e. <1 leukaemic cell in 10 000)
– Assessable by MFC (lower detection limit, between 10−3 and 10−4, higher sensitivity
with 8–12 colour techniques)

MolFail (molecular failure/MRD positivity)

– Patient in CR, not in molCR/molR
– Quantifiable MRD (≥10−4/0.01%, i.e. ≥1 leukaemic cell in 10 000)
– Assessable by MFC (lower detection limit, between 10−3 and 10−4)

MolRel (molecular/MRD relapse)

– Patient still in CR, prior molCR/molR
– Loss of molCR/molR status (≥10−4/0.01%, i.e. >1 leukaemic cell in 10 000)
– Assessable by MFC (lower detection limit, between 10−3 and 10−4)

Relapse

– Loss of CR status
– Haematological relapse (BM ALL blasts >5%)
– Extramedullary relapse (CNS, other site)

MRD, minimal residual disease; BM/PB/CSF, bone marrow/peripheral blood/cerebro-spinal fluid; MFC, multiparameter flow cytometry; ALL, acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia; CNS, central nervous system.

molCR after induction therapy in several studies had signiﬁcantly superior outcomes, with a DFS of 54%–74%, compared
with 17%–40% for MRD-positive patients [25–31]. Patients
with molecular failure (molFail) after induction proceeded to
allogeneic haematopoietic SCT, and their outcome was thereby
substantially improved, compared with the chemotherapy-only
arm [29, 32, 33].
The question arises as to whether the evaluation of MRD overcomes all of the pre-therapeutic risk factors, or whether MRD
should be combined with the pre-therapeutic factors [27, 34, 35].
A practical approach is to bring the conventional prognostic factors
and MRD into a decision algorithm. At diagnosis, patients are
stratifıed into SR and HR groups, since HR patients are potential
candidates for SCT in ﬁrst complete remission (CR1), and an early
donor search is warranted. However, it is not clear how to proceed
with HR patients in molCR/molecular remission, although some
studies suggest a lack of beneﬁt from SCT in these patients. Also,
MRD is not available for all patients, and the risk stratiﬁcation in
those patients should rely on conventional risk factors. Overall, a
rapid yet comprehensive diagnostic approach is essential for accurate risk deﬁnitions and appropriate risk-related treatment choices
(Figure 1).

treatment of newly diagnosed ALL
pre-phase therapy and supportive measures
When the diagnosis is established, treatment should start immediately, preferably in a specialised hospital; that is, physicians
with experience in the treatment of acute leukaemia, a welltrained nursing staff, sufﬁcient supportive care (e.g. platelet substitution) and access to an intensive care unit. A pre-phase
therapy with corticosteroids (usually prednisone 20–60 mg/day

v | Hoelzer et al.

or dexamethasone 6–16 mg/day, both i.v. or p.o.) alone, or in
combination with another drug (e.g. vincristine, cyclophosphamide), is often given together with allopurinol and hydration for
∼5–7 days. The ﬁrst intra-thecal therapy for central nervous
system (CNS) prophylaxis is administered in this period in
some studies. The pre-phase therapy allows a safe tumour reduction, avoiding in most cases a tumour lysis syndrome (TLS)
[35]. In some cases, rasburicase may be given to prevent TLS. In
cases with a very high WBC count (e.g. >100 000/µl), either
measure is sufﬁcient, and a leukapheresis is needed only in very
rare cases. The time needed for pre-phase therapy will also allow
to obtain the results of the diagnostic work-up, e.g. cytogenetics,
molecular genetics. The response to pre-phase therapy deﬁnes
the chemosensitivity of the disease, and is included in some
studies for risk assessment, since good responders to prednisone
may have a better outcome [36].
Supportive therapy should be initiated whenever necessary
early on, e.g. to treat infections or to substitute platelets/erythrocytes. Severe neutropaenia (<500/µl) is often seen at diagnosis
and is most frequent (>80%) during induction therapy, causing
infections and infection-related death. A joint analysis of ﬁve
randomised trials revealed a shorter duration of neutropaenia,
and reduction in the rate of febrile neutropaenia in some but not
all cases [37], and based on that, prophylactic granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor should be considered during induction therapy [II, B].

treatment: remission induction therapy
and consolidation
induction of complete remission. The goal of induction therapy
is the achievement of a CR, or even better, a molCR/good
molecular response, usually evaluated within 6–16 weeks from

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

Annals of Oncology

clinical practice guidelines

Figure 1. Diagnosis and risk assessment in adult ALL for achievement of CR and risk-oriented post-remission therapy. Major diagnostic subsets are identiﬁed
within 1–2 days to allow start of pre-phase therapy, identify cases eligible to targeted therapy (TKI in Ph+ ALL), and set up the MRD study. Pre-phase therapy
allows for management/prevention of metabolic/infectious/haemorrhagic complications before start of induction therapy, and checks HLA identity between patient
and siblings. Induction/early consolidation therapy (incorporating CNS prophylaxis) aims to induce CR with a deep MRD response, to support subsequent riskand MRD-oriented therapy with/without allogeneic SCT. ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; RT-PCR, reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction; MRD,
minimal residual disease; LAIP, leukaemia-associated immunophenotype; WBC, white blood cells; CR, complete remission; CNS, central nervous system;
SR, standard risk; HR, high risk; SCT, stem-cell transplantation; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor; Ph+, Philadelphia-positive; HLA, human leucocyte antigen.

start of chemotherapy, after which time the achievement of molCR
is rather uncommon. Most regimens are centred on vincristine,
corticosteroids, and anthracycline (daunorubicin, doxorubicin,
rubidazone, idarubicin), with or without cyclophosphamide or
cytarabine. L-Asparaginase is the only ALL-speciﬁc drug that
depletes the asparagine levels and has been particularly explored in
paediatric trials. It is now more intensively used in adults. Pegylated

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

asparaginase (PEG-Asp) has the advantage of a signiﬁcantly longer
period of asparagine depletion. Dexamethasone is often preferred to
prednisone, since it penetrates the blood–brain barrier and also acts
on resting leukaemic blast cells (LBCs).
results of induction therapy. There are no randomised trials
comparing different induction regimens; however, there is a

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw025 | v

clinical practice guidelines
substantial number of large (>100 patients) prospective nonrandomised trials. In 6617 patients from 14 studies, the weighted
mean for the CR rate was 83% (62%–92%) [35]. Using current
approaches, the CR rate had increased to 80%–90%, higher for SR
patients at ≥90%, and less in HR patients at ∼75%. There is only one
randomised study for induction therapy; this compares prednisone to
dexamethasone [38], demonstrating equal outcome [I, C].
treatment principles. There are two chemotherapy regimens; one
is a widespread schema patterned after the paediatric BFM (Berlin–
Frankfurt–Münster) protocols with Induction I, Induction II,
Consolidation cycles, sometimes an intermittent re-induction
cycle, and is mostly used in European adult ALL trials.
A schematic treatment algorithm in adult ALL, including
diagnosis and risk assessment for achievement of CR and riskoriented post-remission therapy, is given in Figure 1.
Another approach is to repeat two different alternating
intensive chemotherapy cycles, identical for Induction and
Consolidation, accounting for a total of eight cycles, such as the
hyper-CVAD (cyclophosphamide, vincristine, doxorubicin, dexamethasone) protocol, preferentially used in the United States, but
also in other parts of the world.
post-remission consolidation. The rationale to use systemic
high-dose (HD) therapy is particularly to reach sufﬁcient drug
levels in sanctuary sites, such as the CNS. Most protocols employ
6–8 courses which contain either HD methotrexate or HD
cytarabine ± asparaginase. HD cytarabine is usually administered
for 4–12 doses at 1–3 g/m2 and methotrexate at 1–1.5 g/m2 and
up to 3 g/m2.

maintenance therapy
Maintenance therapy usually consists of daily 6-mercaptopurine
and weekly methotrexate. In some treatment regimens, repeated
cycles of vincristine, dexamethasone or other drugs in monthly
or longer intervals are given. In one randomised study, the
maintenance arm with reinforcement cycles was not superior to
conventional maintenance therapy (37% versus 38% at 8 years)
[36]. A treatment duration of 2.5–3 years is optimal and is
usually recommended.
Omission of maintenance worsens outcome signiﬁcantly in
BCP-ALL, but less so in T-ALL [39], and not in B-ALL [40].

CNS prophylaxis
Effective prophylaxis to prevent CNS relapse is an essential part of
ALL therapy. Treatment modalities of CNS prophylaxis are CNS
irradiation, intra-thecal (i.th.) methotrexate, mono- or i.th. triple
(usually methotrexate, steroids, cytarabine) and systemic HD
therapy with either methotrexate and/or cytarabine. With a combination of these CNS prophylactic measures, the CNS relapse
rate in recent adult ALL trials could be reduced from 10% to <5%.
CNS irradiation is also effective to eradicate residual LBCs in the
CNS; however, in most studies, it is either omitted or restricted to
HR patients. Furthermore, it is given only as an irradiation of the
skull (mostly 24 Gy), and no longer of the whole neuroaxis, since
this aggravates cytopaenias. Patients with CNS involvement
(mostly of the leptomeninges) at diagnosis are treated with the
standard chemotherapy regimen, and additional i.th. applications

v | Hoelzer et al.

Annals of Oncology

until blast clearance in the spinal ﬂuid. Their OS is identical to the
CNS-negative cohort of patients, or slightly inferior [41].

age-adapted protocols
The outcome of ALL is strictly related to the age of a patient, with
cure rates from 80% to 90% in childhood ALL, decreasing to
<10% in elderly/frail ALL patients. Therefore, age-adapted protocols have emerged, where the age limits are mainly directed by the
haematological and non-haematological toxicities. Although there
is no uniform consensus, the following age groups are separated:

• Adolescents and young adults (AYA), differently deﬁned
from 15/18 to 35/40 years,

• Adult ALL, age range 35/40 up to ≤55/60 years,
• Elderly ALL protocols for patients above the age of >55/60
years, and

• Frail patients not suitable for any intensive therapy, usually
considered above the age of 70/75 years.
adolescents and young adults. Paediatric-inspired therapy provides
an increased drug intensity at several treatment steps, including
larger cumulative doses of drugs such as corticosteroids, vincristine,
L-asparaginase and consequent CNS-directed therapy, which
should be strictly adhered to, with a reduced role of SCT. In a
systemic review and meta-analysis in 2012, in 11 trials including
2489 AYA patients, paediatric-inspired regimens were superior
to conventional adult chemotherapy [42]. None of the trials
were a randomised comparison. In recent studies for AYAs [43–
45], survival rates at 5 years were 67%–78%, compared with
34%–41% with the former protocols.
adult ALL. The treatment results for adult ALL patients have
also improved. In the above-mentioned 14 studies, the weighted
mean for DFS was 34% (25% at 5 years, 48% at 3 years) and the
OS 38% (27% at 9 years, 54% at 5 years). Currently, the OS rates
for SR adult ALL patients is 50%–70% with chemotherapy alone.
The outcome for HR patients has also improved, from 20%–30%
to ∼50% when they receive an allogeneic SCT in CR1. Prospective
adult studies applying the same drugs and time–dose intensity,
using or not using the term ‘paediatric-inspired’, or some using
the term ‘paediatric-derived’, achieved identical results compared
with AYAs, with survival rates of 60%–70% or more [46–49].
elderly ALL. The incidence of ALL is increasing after the age of
50 years [50]. Different approaches have been applied in this
patient cohort [51]. Older patients (55–91 years) with a palliative
treatment had a CR rate of 43% (34%–53%), an early death rate
of 24% (18%–42%) and an OS of only 7 months (3–10 months).
In contrast, those with an intensive chemotherapy designed for
adult ALL had a CR rate of 56% (40%–81%), but still an early
death rate of 23% (6%–42%), and an OS of 14 months (3–29
months). In recent decades, several elderly speciﬁc ALL protocols
have been initiated. Their principle is a less intensive therapy,
based on corticosteroids, vincristine and asparaginase, and largely
avoiding anthracyclines and alkylating agents, to reduce early
treatment-related death. In nine prospective studies for older ALL
patients (55–81 years), with this less intensive protocol, the CR
rate was 71% (43%–90%), early death decreased to 15% (0%–36%)

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

Annals of Oncology

and OS was signiﬁcant at 33 months (16–71 months). Thus, all
patients, irrespective of age, should be offered a treatment.

targeted therapies
There is still a need to improve the outcome in adult and elderly
ALL that is achieved with chemotherapy/SCT alone. Currently,
there are two major new approaches, particularly for B-lineage
ALL patients; either therapies with antibodies, or, for Ph+ ALL,
targeted therapies with TKIs.
antibodies. The anti-CD20 MoAb rituximab has substantially
improved the outcome in Burkitt leukaemia/lymphoma, as
demonstrated by a single randomised trial [52]. Repeated short
cycles of intensive chemotherapy, combined with rituximab
increased OS from 62% to 83% (reviewed in [40]). The antiCD20 antibody is also being applied in CD20-positive de novo Blineage ALL, with encouraging results [53], and randomised trials
are ongoing. The monoclonal antibodies directed against CD22,
linked to cytotoxic agents, either to calicheamicin (inotuzumab
ozogamicin) or to plant or bacterial toxins (epratuzumab), are
explored in refractory/relapsed childhood and adult ALL [54].
Targeting CD19 is of great interest, as it is expressed in all Blineage cells, most likely including early lymphoid precursor cells.
The bispeciﬁc antibody blinatumomab combines single chain
antibodies to CD19 and CD3, and thereby T cells lyse the CD19bearing B cells. It is effective in patients with positive MRD [55]
or refractory/relapsed ALL [56]. The CD19 antigen is also the
target for a promising new approach, the use of chimaeric antigen
receptor-modiﬁed T cells (CAR T cells) [57, 58].
In T-ALL, speciﬁc antibodies as in B-lineage ALL are not
available. The few new drugs under investigation are nelarabine,
which is active in advanced disease [59, 60] (currently evaluated
in ﬁrst-line therapy), and γ-secretase inhibitors blocking Notch1
signalling.
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in Ph+ ALL. When compared with
the pre-imatinib era [61, 62], CR rates improved from 60%–70%
to 80%–90% or even higher and short-term outcome was much
better in relatively small non-randomised studies, which mostly
simply added imatinib to their previous standard chemotherapy
regimens in Ph+ ALL patients [63, 64]. These marked
improvements were then conﬁrmed in the long term [65–68],
with survival reaching ∼50%, compared with ≤20% in the preimatinib era, making combined imatinib/chemotherapy the
standard treatment of Ph+ ALL. Early enthusiasm was such that
even the place of allogeneic SCT in ﬁrst CR (which was
considered as the only curative option for Ph+ ALL patients) was
challenged. Nevertheless, a recent prospective trial from the
GRAALL (Group for Research on Adult Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia) suggests that allogeneic SCT is still associated with a
better relapse-free survival in younger Ph+ ALL patients [69].
These younger patients may receive standard myeloablative
conditioning (MAC), but the role of reduced-intensity
conditioning (RIC)-SCT in older patients remains to be
prospectively evaluated. After SCT, a recent randomised study
from the GMALL (German Multicenter Study Group for Adult
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia) suggests that prophylactic
imatinib maintenance is probably the best option to prevent post-

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

clinical practice guidelines
SCT relapse after MAC-SCT [70]. This remains to be studied
after RIC-SCT.
Whether a subset of good-risk patients may be treated with
continuous TKI/chemotherapy and be proposed allogeneic SCT
in ﬁrst CR is still under evaluation, as is the optimal TKI/
chemotherapy combination that could be offered to such
patients. Achievement of a good early MRD response (here evaluated on BCR-ABL1 transcript levels) might be of great help in
deﬁning these good-risk patients [71]. In older Ph+ ALL
patients, usually not candidates for allogeneic SCT, a poor MRD
response but also the presence of additional chromosomal abnormalities at diagnosis were both associated with a worse
outcome [72]. It has also been shown that the presence of IKZF1
gene deletion, a frequent event in Ph+ ALL, may be of poor
prognostic value, as also observed in Ph− ALL patients [73, 74].
The last issue relies on which is the best TKI/chemotherapy
front-line combination. Usually, TKI therapy is initiated in frontline therapy together with the ﬁrst chemotherapy cycle. A continuous TKI exposure should be favoured, even if a few weeks off
may be needed to limit myelosuppression [75]. To date, there is
no comparative study evaluating second-generation TKIs (nilotinib, dasatinib) versus imatinib as ﬁrst-line treatment. The use
of nilotinib and dasatinib may result in achieving a good MRD
response more quickly, which could be of interest before SCT. On
the other hand, more potent TKIs could induce a higher incidence of rate of resistance mutation, as was observed with T315I
mutations at relapse in older patients receiving front-line dasatinib [72]. Combination of TKIs with dose-reduced chemotherapy
should probably be preferred, compared with standard intensive
chemotherapy/TKI combinations [76]. This has been randomly
demonstrated in the GRAAPH-2005 trial, with lower early mortality and higher CR rate in patients receiving imatinib, combined
with less intensive chemotherapy compared with those receiving
Hyper-CVAD/imatinib [69]. GIMEMA (the Italian Group for
Haematological Diseases in Adults) has also reported very good
response rates and short-term outcomes in older patients treated
almost exclusively with front-line dasatinib [77]. Once CR has
been reached, autologous SCT might also be a good option, at
least in patients who have reached a good MRD response, or in
those who cannot tolerate allogeneic SCT [69, 78, 79].
In patients with persistent MRD or progressive disease, the
recommendation is to switch to another TKI while screening for
TKI resistance mutations and then to adapt TKI choice according to the resistance proﬁle. The third-generation TKI ponatinib
is currently the only option in patients progressing with the
T315I mutation.
tyrosine kinase inhibitors in Ph-like ALL. TKIs might be also
used as targeted treatment in some patients with Ph− ALL. The
Ph-like entity has recently been described as associated with a
gene expression signature similar to Ph+ ALL, but with no Ph
chromosome or BCR-ABL1 rearrangement. Kinase-activating
events, including ABL1 itself, PDGFR-beta, JAK2 or other kinases
are frequently found in this poor-prognosis ALL subset [16], and
some remarkable cases of TKI treatment success have been
reported in these patients [80, 81]. Imatinib, dasatinib or even
ruxolitinib could thus be evaluated in these patients, who
frequently have primary refractory ALL or very early relapse. See
Table 4.

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw025 | v

clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology

Table 4. Recommendations for TKI/chemotherapy combinations in adults with Ph+ ALL
Recommendation
Adults with Ph+ ALL should be treated front line with a combination of imatinib or second-generation TKI and chemotherapy.
Reduced-intensity chemotherapy may be used in combination with TKI during the first treatment cycles, to minimise early toxicity
and mortality.
TKI should be administered as continuously as possible, with respect to haematological tolerance.
There is no standard post-remission treatment in patients not receiving allogeneic SCT because of no donor or advanced age.
Prolonged administration of imatinib/consolidation chemotherapy followed by imatinib maintenance should be applied.
Allogeneic SCT in first CR with a standard myeloablative conditioning probably remains the best post-remission option in younger
patients with a donor. The role of reduced-intensity conditioning allogeneic SCT remains to be evaluated in this ALL subset.
Post-SCT imatinib maintenance is recommended for 1–2 years of duration.
Prolonged monitoring of BCR-ABL1 MRD levels is recommended, associated with resistance mutation screening in patients with
persistent MRD detection or re-increasing MRD levels. Results should be used to guide the switch towards a second- or thirdgeneration TKI in these higher risk patients.

Mandatory
Recommended
Recommended
Recommended
Recommended
Recommended
Recommended

TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor; Ph+, Philadelphia-positive; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; SCT, stem-cell transplantation; CR, complete remission;
MRD, minimal residual disease.

stem-cell transplantation
Despite the existence of studies and meta-analyses comparing
chemotherapy and SCT [82], the issue of the indications of SCT
in adult ALL patients in ﬁrst CR is not deﬁned in a satisfactory
way and requires continuous update. This is due to the improving results with conventional and targeted chemotherapy regimens on one hand and to the decreasing mortality and broader
availability of SCT on the other. Several attempts have been
made to provide evidence-based guidelines for indication of
SCT (Table 5, ref. [83]) [84–86] [V, A]. From these guidelines,
the OS for SCT was superior to chemotherapy in HR patients
[I, A], but left the role of SCT in SR open [I, C]. On the
other hand, there is a general agreement that SCT is clearly
the best therapeutic option for patients in second or later CR
[III, A].
Some important issues emerged from the results of recent
studies:
1) Whether or not SCT should be offered to AYA with SR factors
treated with paediatric-based or -inspired protocols that
provide long-term OS rates ∼70% [87]. In view of these
results, most groups skip SCT in these patients to avoid acute
mortality and long-term effects [III, B].
2) The use of MRD (the most important prognostic factor
in ALL) to guide the decision of chemotherapy or SCT after
consolidation. Data from recent studies have shown that SCT
offers better results than chemotherapy in patients with high
MRD levels after consolidation, regardless of the conventional risk factors at baseline [29] [III, A]. The question remains
whether SCT is justiﬁed in patients with conventional HR
features but low or negative MRD after consolidation, for
whom OS rates >50% are expected with chemotherapy [29,
31–33]. Phase III studies addressing this point are desirable,
because the trials included in the most recent meta-analysis
[82] did not incorporate the MRD analysis as a decision tool.
3) The indication for the different types of SCT. Regarding allogeneic SCT, there is increasing evidence that sibling and very wellmatched, unrelated donors (MUD) SCT can be considered
equivalent options in terms of results and, therefore, MUD

v | Hoelzer et al.

SCT can be offered to patients lacking a sibling donor [IV, A].
Umbilical cord blood can be an alternative source when
an HSCT is needed urgently or when the search for a very
well-matched, unrelated donor is unsuccessful [88–90].
Haploidentical SCT could be an option in patients without a
matched sibling or MUD, but prospective comparative studies
are lacking. In turn, autologous SCT is considered inferior to
chemotherapy and to allogeneic SCT [91] [I, A], but could be
reconsidered in MRD-negative patients [92] unﬁt for allogenic
SCT [IV, D], as has been shown in patients with Ph+ ALL [71].
4) The intensity of the conditioning. There is no standard MAC
regimen, but total body irradiation-based regimens seem to
have better anti-leukaemic activity than busulfan-based preparative regimens [93] [IV, B]. RIC regimens are increasingly
considered as an option for elderly HR patients or patients with
contraindications for MAC-SCT [84, 94] [IV, B], but no prospective comparative studies between these two types of preparative regimens have been conducted in young, ﬁt patients.
5) The need for SCT in speciﬁc genetically deﬁned groups of
ALL, such as BCR-ABL1-positive (as previously reviewed) or
MLL-positive cases. Allogeneic SCT is currently carried out
for MLL-rearranged ALL in most trials and, in the largest
study conducted to date, better results have been observed
compared with chemotherapy [95] [IV, A].

treatment of relapsed or refractory ALL
Relapsed ALL in adults is still a major clinical challenge. There
is no universally accepted treatment protocol and a lack of evidence based on randomised, controlled trials. However, there is
consensus on the general approach to managing these patients.

diagnostic work-up
Therapy-related AML should be excluded. Enumeration of
CD19, CD20 and CD22 expression on blast cells is important as
it may have therapeutic relevance. Cytogenetic evaluation should
take into account fusion proteins that may indicate a BCR-ABLlike phenotype [16, 81]. If allogeneic SCT is a possible therapeutic
option, and if this was not done at diagnosis, the HLA proﬁling
of the patient and siblings should be carried out urgently, and an

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology

Table 5. Recommendations for SCT in adult ALL (data from [83])
Question

Recommendations

CR1. AutoSCT versus nontransplantation

– Not recommended outside a clinical trial
– Maintenance therapy, biological therapy, or TKIs may improve outcomes in selected patients

CR1. AlloSCT versus nontransplantation

– AlloSCT recommended in all patients with poor early MRD response
– AlloSCT not recommended in SR patients with sustained molecular response
– Indication unclear in HR patients with sustained molecular response

CR ≥2. AlloSCT versus
non-transplantation

– AlloSCT superior

AlloSCT versus autoSCT

– Advantage for alloSCT
– Insufficient data in patients with negative MRD levels, including Ph+ ALL

Sibling donor versus MUD

– Similar, and possibly equivalent survival outcomes

UD CBT versus UD BMT

– Consider CBT if no HLA-well-matched donor or need for urgent SCT
– Haploidentical SCT should also be considered in this setting

Conditioning regimens

– Benefit of TBI regimens for myeloablative SCT
– RIC regimens appropriate only for adults in remission unfit for myeloablative conditioning and elderly fit
patients

Areas of research needed

Comments

AlloSCT versus more intensive/specific
CHT regimens

– Re-evaluate, especially in the context of biological therapies and TKIs

MRD to guide therapy in ALL

– Increasing importance of the monitoring of MRD during initial treatment to guide individual patient
eligibility and timing of allogeneic SCT

MRD monitoring after SCT

– To detect early post-SCT relapse for pre-emptive therapy
– Effective therapies are under development

RIC versus MAC regimens

– Further studies needed, adjusted for a patient’s tolerance of conditioning toxicity balanced against the
risk of relapse

CBT techniques

– Single unit, double unit, ex vivo expansion, third-party donor. Larger multicentre experience needed to
evaluate the broader applicability of CB grafting for adults with ALL

Haploidentical SCT

– Comparative studies with SCT from other sources needed (non-randomised comparisons show similar
results)

QoL and functional status after
successful SCT

– Evaluation and measures for improvement needed

SCT, stem-cell transplantation; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; CR1, first complete remission; autoSCT, autologous stem-cell transplantation; TKIs,
tyrosine kinase inhibitors; alloSCT, allogeneic stem-cell transplantation; MRD, minimal residual disease; SR, standard risk; HR, high risk; CR ≥2, second or
later complete remission; Ph+, Philadelphia-positive; MUD, matched unrelated donor; UD, unrelated donor; CBT, cord blood transplantation; BMT, bone
marrow transplantation; HLA, human leucocyte antigen; TBI, total body irradiation; RIC, reduced-intensity conditioning; CHT, chemotherapy; MAC,
myeloablative conditioning; CB, cord blood; QoL, quality of life.

unrelated donor search should be initiated if a sibling match is
not available. In the case of Ph+ ALL, BCR-ABL1 tyrosine kinase
domain mutations should be evaluated [96].
Overall evaluation of the clinical situation should take into
account the disease-speciﬁc factors (BCP-ALL or T-ALL, BCRABL1 status), patient factors (age, performance status, organ
function and presence of extramedullary disease, in particular
CNS), previous therapy (with particular reference to prior allograft, anthracycline dose) and speciﬁc toxicities of prior treatment
which might guide therapeutic selection (e.g. osteonecrosis, vinca
alkaloid neuropathy and speciﬁc infectious complications such as
fungal infections).

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

treatment principles
Treatment with a curative aim involves achievement of CR followed by allogeneic SCT. In four large trials, the outcome was
very similar [59, 97–99]. The rate of second CR achieved was
44%–45%, the median OS 4.5–8.4 months (24% at 3 years in one
study). Long duration of ﬁrst CR (>2 years), then re-induction
with a standard induction regimen—such as that used for original
treatment—may be used [59, 97–99]. Short ﬁrst CR or primary
refractory disease is a very high-risk situation, and consideration
should immediately be given to the availability of trials of novel
agents that may be non-cross-resistant with chemotherapy. For
BCP-ALL, such agents are now more widely available. Both

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw025 | v

clinical practice guidelines
blinatumomab [56] and inotuzumab [96] have shown promising
results in phase II studies and are being evaluated in randomised,
controlled trials where the comparator arm is ‘standard of care’
chemotherapy. A clinical trial involving immunotherapy with
CD19 CAR T-cell therapy [58] is also a possibility.
chemotherapy for relapsed ALL. The most commonly used
regimens in Europe are ﬂudarabine- and anthracycline-containing
regimens, for example, FLAG-Ida (ﬂudarabine, high-dose ara-C,

Annals of Oncology

granulocyte colony-stimulating factor and idarubicin). Despite its
common use and inclusion as ‘standard of care’ arm in current
randomised, controlled trials of relapsed ALL, there is remarkably
little published on FLAG-Ida in relapsed ALL [97]. Clofarabinebased regimens including cytarabine, cyclophosphamide or
etoposide are also commonly used based mostly on data in
childhood ALL [98]. Liposomal vincristine [99] is licensed for the
treatment of relapsed ALL. These standard chemotherapy
approaches are applicable in BCP-ALL as well as in T-ALL.

Table 6. Summary of recommendations for adult ALL
Diagnostic work-up of ALL

•
•
•
•

Morphology, immunophenotype and cytogenetics to confirm the diagnosis and ALL subsets are mandatory
New genetics and molecular genetics are recommended to detect rare subtypes, such as Ph-like ALL, ETP ALL
Targets for therapy with TKIs or antibodies have to be identified
Minimal residual disease by immunophenotype or molecular probe at diagnosis, for MRD-based risk classification and treatment algorithm, mandatory

Risk assessment and prognostic factors

•
•
•

It is essential to stratify patients as standard-risk or high-risk patients
Risk stratification is currently determined by a combination of prognostic factors at diagnosis and treatment-related parameters, preferentially MRD
MRD during therapy is now the most relevant prognostic parameter for treatment decisions

Treatment
Treatment algorithm

•
•
•

Chemotherapy includes induction therapy 1–2 months, consolidation cycles (alternating) 6–8 months and maintenance therapy 2–2.5 years
Ongoing chemotherapy protocols for AYAs use paediatric-type regimens
Prophylactic treatment to prevent CNS relapse is mandatory

Antibody therapy

•
•
•
•
•

Anti-CD20 rituximab in combination with a chemotherapy is strongly recommended for Burkitt leukaemia/lymphoma
Anti-CD22 immunoconjugates directed against CD22 currently under investigation
Anti-CD19; activation of patients’ own T cells directed against CD19
Bispecific (CD3/CD19) blinatumomab under investigation
Chimaeric antigen receptor-modified T cells directed against CD19 in early phase

Targeted therapy with TKIs in Ph+ ALL

•
•
•

A TKI should be combined with chemotherapy in front-line therapy
The TKI imatinib (400–800 mg/day) should be administered continuously, also post-SCT
Prolonged monitoring of BCR-ABL-1 MRD is recommended, as well as resistance mutation screening. In case of persisting MRD, increasing MRD
level, or resistance mutation, switch to a second- or third-generation TKI

SCT

•
•
•
•

AlloSCT in CR1 significantly improves OS and EFS in high-risk patients/MRD+ patients and is the best post-remission option for Ph+ ALL and
MLL-rearranged ALL
Conditioning regimens are age-adapted with full allo versus RIC for elderly patients or patients unfit for full conditioning
The role of autoSCT should be investigated for MRD-negative patients, in the setting of clinical trials
All patients in CR ≥2 are candidates for alloSCT

Approach for relapsed/ refractory ALL

•
•
•

Full diagnostic work-up necessary to exclude/reveal clonal aberrations, and to provide bases for targeted therapies
Different treatment for patients with short versus long first remission duration (>18/24 months) where re-induction is considered
Treatment; there is no standard re-induction therapy established, most often used new drugs

ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukaemia; Ph, Philadelphia; ETP, early T-cell precursor; MRD, minimal residual disease; AYAs, adolescents and young adults;
CNS, central nervous system; TKI, tyrosine kinase inhibitor; Ph+, Philadelphia-positive; SCT, stem-cell transplantation; alloSCT, allogeneic SCT; CR1, first
complete remission; OS, overall survival; EFS, event-free survival; RIC, reduced-intensity conditioning; autoSCT, autologous SCT; CR ≥2, second or later
complete remission.

v | Hoelzer et al.

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

Annals of Oncology

Table 7. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation
(adapted from the Infectious Diseases Society of America-United
States Public Health Service Grading Systema)
Levels of evidence
I

II

III
IV
V

Evidence from at least one large randomised, controlled trial of
good methodological quality (low potential for bias) or metaanalyses of well-conducted randomised trials without
heterogeneity
Small randomised trials or large randomised trials with a
suspicion of bias (lower methodological quality) or metaanalyses of such trials or of trials with demonstrated
heterogeneity
Prospective cohort studies
Retrospective cohort studies or case–control studies
Studies without control group, case reports, experts opinions

Grades of recommendation
A
B
C

D
E

Strong evidence for efficacy with a substantial clinical benefit,
strongly recommended
Strong or moderate evidence for efficacy but with a limited
clinical benefit, generally recommended
Insufficient evidence for efficacy or benefit does not outweigh
the risk or the disadvantages (adverse events, costs, …),
optional
Moderate evidence against efficacy or for adverse outcome,
generally not recommended
Strong evidence against efficacy or for adverse outcome, never
recommended

a

By permission of the Infectious Diseases Society of America [100].

Additionally, nelarabine is licensed for this indication, and a
response rate of about 50% is noted [59]. Myelotoxicity is mild to
moderate, but the neurotoxicity can be severe and irreversible.
Co-administration with agents used to treat CNS disease can
increase the risk.

Ph+ ALL. Patients with relapsed Ph+ ALL should be offered the
new generations of TKIs, according to the results of mutational
analysis of their BCR-ABL1 transcripts. Patients who have lost
response to imatinib may respond to nilotinib or dasatinib and
there is even an option, ponatinib, for patients with the T315I
mutation. Although TKIs are not without adverse events
(ponatinib, in particular, carries a risk of cardiovascular events),
they are nonetheless a vastly superior option compared with
repetitive treatment with myelosuppressive chemotherapy, as they
preserve performance status and are better tolerated by elderly
patients. There is no evidence of long-term survival induced by
TKIs post-relapse and the majority of patients will have to receive
allogeneic SCT. Second allografts are being reported, and there are
case reports of good outcomes, although of uncertain long-term
beneﬁt.
Even in a palliative setting BCR-ABL1, kinase domain mutational analysis should be carried out and used to guide therapy
with TKIs and to monitor treatment response and impending
relapse.

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

clinical practice guidelines
personalised medicine
Progress in the diagnosis of ALL with identiﬁcation of genomicdeﬁned sub-entities, the evaluation of MRD, and new targeted
therapies have led to a substantial realisation of personalised
medicine in adult ALL. Current options such as less intensive
chemotherapy, new modalities of SCT, incorporation of targeted
therapies and optimal combinations of treatments require prospective, cooperative research, hereby further reﬁning the individualised approach to each patient.

follow-up and long-term implications
The follow-up of asymptomatic patients should include blood
cell counts and routine chemistry during maintenance therapy;
usually every 2 weeks during the ﬁrst 2 years to adjust treatment
accordingly. Thereafter, follow-up should be 3-monthly in years
1, 2 and 3, since the majority of relapses occur within the ﬁrst
2.5 years after initiation of treatment; then half-yearly in the 4th
and 5th year. For evaluation of MRD, which is now the most important prognostic parameter, bone marrow aspiration is
required 3-monthly. It is also desirable in Ph+ MRD to search
for MRD (BCR-ABL) and, if possible, for mutations to switch to
another TKI inhibitor.
In adults, adverse long-term effects are fewer compared with
children with ALL, and most adult ALL patients are in good
clinical conditions. Relevant late toxicities are: endocrinological
disorders (thyroid, gonadal), osteonecrosis/osteoporosis, skin
and mucosal disorders, cataract, cardiovascular disorders, infection, graft versus host disease/sicca syndrome, fatigue and cognitive disorders. Second malignancies can also occur but with a
low frequency (<3%) after chemotherapy as well as SCT. Longterm observation including quality-of-life assessment of cured
ALL patients is an essential part of treatment optimisation
studies.

methodology
These clinical practice guidelines were developed in accordance
with the ESMO standard operating procedures for clinical practice guidelines development, http://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/
ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The relevant literature has
been selected by the expert authors. A summary of recommendations is presented in Table 6. Levels of evidence and grades of
recommendation have been applied using the system is provided
in Table 7. Statements without grading were considered justiﬁed
standard clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty.
This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer
review process.

conﬂict of interest
DH has reported advisory boards for Amgen, Pﬁzer, Erytech
and Bristol-Myers Squibb. AF has reported advisory boards for
Amgen and Pﬁzer. CB has reported honoraria from Roche,
Pﬁzer, Celgene, Pharmacyclics and Janssen and research grants
from Roche and Janssen. RB, JR and HD have reported no potential conﬂicts of interest.

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw025 | v

clinical practice guidelines
references
1. Sant M, Allemani C, Tereanu C et al. Incidence of hematologic malignancies in
Europe by morphologic subtype: results of the HAEMACARE project. Blood 2010;
116: 3724–3734.
2. Inaba H, Greaves M, Mullighan CG. Acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet
2013; 381: 1943–1955.
3. Sant M, Minicozzi P, Mounier M et al. Survival for haematological malignancies in
Europe between 1997 and 2008 by region and age: results of EUROCARE-5, a
population-based study. Lancet Oncol 2014; 15: 931–942.
4. Jaffe ES, Harris NL, Stein H et al. Introduction and overview of the classiﬁcation
of the lymphoid neoplasms. In Swerdlow SH, Campo E, Harris NL et al. (eds),
WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumours of Haematopoietic and Lymphoid Tissue. Lyon:
IARC, 2008; 158–166.
5. Foà R, Guarini A, Vitale A. Approach to the patient with a suspect of ALL. In
Goekbuget N, Bassan R, Dombret H et al. (eds), Recommendations of the
European Working Group for Adult ALL. Bremen-London-Boston: UNI-MED
Verlag AG, 2011; 24–31.
6. Chiaretti S, Zini G, Bassan R. Diagnosis and subclassiﬁcation of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis 2014; 6: e2014073.
7. Bennett JM, Catovsky D, Daniel MT et al. The morphological classiﬁcation of
acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: concordance among observers and clinical
correlations. Br J Haematol 1981; 47: 553–561.
8. Béné MC, Castoldi G, Knapp W et al. Proposals for the immunological classiﬁcation
of acute leukemias. European Group for the Immunological Characterization of
Leukemias (EGIL). Leukemia 1995; 9: 1783–1786.
9. Béné MC, Nebe T, Bettelheim P et al. Immunophenotyping of acute leukemia
and lymphoproliferative disorders: a consensus proposal of the European
LeukemiaNet Work Package 10. Leukemia 2011; 25: 567–574.
10. Matutes E, Pickl WF, van’t Veer M et al. Mixed-phenotype acute leukemia:
clinical and laboratory features and outcome in 100 patients deﬁned according to
the WHO 2008 classiﬁcation. Blood 2011; 117: 3163–3171.
11. van Dongen JM, Lhermitte L, Böttcher S et al. EuroFlow antibody panels for
standardized n-dimensional ﬂow cytometric immunophenotyping of normal,
reactive and malignant leukocytes. Leukemia 2012; 26: 1908–1975.
12. Gleissner B, Gökbuget N, Bartram CR et al. Leading prognostic relevance of the
BCR-ABL translocation in adult acute B-lineage lymphoblastic leukemia: a
prospective study of the German Multicenter Trial Group and conﬁrmed
polymerase chain reaction analysis. Blood 2002; 99: 1536–1543.
13. Moorman AV, Harrison CJ, Buck GA et al. Karyotype is an independent prognostic
factor in adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL): analysis of cytogenetic
data from patients treated on the Medical Research Council (MRC) UKALLXII/
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 2993 trial. Blood 2007; 109:
3189–3197.
14. Pullarkat V, Slovak ML, Kopecky KJ et al. Impact of cytogenetics on the outcome
of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia: results of Southwest Oncology Group
9400 study. Blood 2008; 111: 2563–2572.
15. Mancini M, Scappaticci D, Cimino G et al. A comprehensive genetic classiﬁcation
of adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL): analysis of the GIMEMA0496
protocol. Blood 2005; 105: 3434–3441.
16. Roberts KG, Li Y, Payne-Turner D et al. Targetable kinase-activating lesions in
Ph-like acute lymphoblastic leukemia. N Engl J Med 2014; 371: 1005–1015.
17. Trinquand A, Tanguy-Schmidt A, Ben Abdelali R et al. Toward a NOTCH1/
FBXW7/RAS/PTEN-based oncogenetic risk classiﬁcation of adult T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: a Group for Research in Adult Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia study. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 4333–4342.
18. Coustan-Smith E, Mullighan CG, Onciu M et al. Early T-cell precursor leukaemia:
a subtype of very high-risk acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Lancet Oncol 2009;
10: 147–156.
19. Brüggemann M, Raff T, Kneba M. Has MRD monitoring superseded other
prognostic factors in adult ALL? Blood 2012; 120: 4470–4481.
20. Hoelzer D, Thiel E, Löfﬂer H et al. Prognostic factors in a multicenter study for
treatment of acute lymphoblastic leukemia in adults. Blood 1988; 71: 123–131.
21. Rowe JM. Prognostic factors in adult acute lymphoblastic leukaemia. Br J
Haematol 2010; 150: 389–405.

v | Hoelzer et al.

Annals of Oncology
22. Brüggemann M, Schrauder A, Raff T et al. Standardized MRD quantiﬁcation in
European ALL trials. In: Proceedings of the Second International Symposium on
MRD assessment in Kiel, Germany, 18–20 September 2008. Leukemia 2010;
24: 521–535.
23. Campana D. Minimal residual disease in acute lymphoblastic leukemia.
Hematology Am Soc Hematol Educ Program 2010; 2010: 7–12.
24. Garand R, Beldjord K, Cavé H et al. Flow cytometry and IG/TCR quantitative PCR
for minimal residual disease quantitation in acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a
French multicenter prospective study on behalf of the FRALLE, EORTC and
GRAALL. Leukemia 2013; 27: 370–376.
25. Holowiecki J, Krawczyk-Kulis M, Giebel S et al. Status of minimal residual
disease after induction predicts outcome in both standard and high-risk Phnegative adult acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: the Polish Adult Leukemia Group
ALL 4-2002 MRD Study. Br J Haematol 2008; 142: 227–237.
26. Patel B, Rai L, Buck G et al. Minimal residual disease is a signiﬁcant predictor of
treatment failure in non T-lineage adult acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: ﬁnal results
of the international trial UKALL XII/ECOG2993. Br J Haematol 2010; 148: 80–89.
27. Beldjord K, Chevret S, Asnaﬁ V et al. Oncogenetics and minimal residual disease
are independent outcome predictors in adult patients with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood 2014; 123: 3739–3749.
28. Brüggemann M, Raff T, Flohr T et al. Clinical signiﬁcance of minimal residual
disease quantiﬁcation in adult patients with standard-risk acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Blood 2006; 107: 1116–1123.
29. Gökbuget N, Kneba M, Raff T et al. Adult patients with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
and molecular failure display a poor prognosis and are candidates for stem cell
transplantation and targeted therapies. Blood 2012; 120: 1868–1876.
30. Bassan R, Spinelli O, Oldani E et al. Improved risk classiﬁcation for risk-speciﬁc
therapy based on the molecular study of minimal residual disease (MRD) in adult
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Blood 2009; 113: 4153–4162.
31. Ribera JM, Oriol A, Morgades M et al. Treatment of high-risk Philadelphia
chromosome-negative acute lymphoblastic leukemia in adolescents and adults
according to early cytologic response and minimal residual disease after
consolidation assessed by ﬂow cytometry: ﬁnal results of the PETHEMA ALL-AR03 trial. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 1595–1604.
32. Bassan R, Spinelli O, Oldani E et al. Different molecular levels of post-induction
minimal residual disease may predict hematopoietic stem cell transplantation
outcome in adult Philadelphia-negative acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood
Cancer J 2014; 4: e225.
33. Dhédin N, Huynh A, Maury S et al. Role of allogeneic stem cell transplantation in
adult patients with Ph-negative acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 2015; 125:
2486–2496.
34. Hoelzer D, Gökbuget N. Change in prognostic factors. Leukemia 2012; 1(Suppl. 1):
S1–S2.
35. Bassan R, Hoelzer D. Modern therapy of acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin
Oncol 2011; 29: 532–543.
36. Annino L, Vegna ML, Camera A et al. Treatment of adult acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL): long-term follow-up of the GIMEMA ALL 0288 randomized study.
Blood 2002; 99: 863–871.
37. Gökbuget N, Bassan R, Dombret H et al. Recommendations of the European
Working Group for Adult ALL (EWALL), 1st edition. Bremen: UNI-MED Science
Verlag, 2011.
38. Labar B, Suciu S, Willemze R et al. Dexamethasone compared to prednisolone
for adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia or lymphoblastic lymphoma: ﬁnal
results of the ALL-4 randomized, phase III trial of the EORTC Leukemia Group.
Haematologica 2010; 95: 1489–1495.
39. Marks DI, Paietta EM, Moorman AV et al. T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia in
adults: clinical features, immunophenotype, cytogenetics, and outcome from the
large randomized prospective trial (UKALL XII/ECOG 2993). Blood 2009; 114:
5136–5145.
40. Hoelzer D, Walewski J, Döhner H et al. Improved outcome of adult Burkitt
lymphoma/leukemia with rituximab and chemotherapy: report of a large
prospective multicenter trial. Blood 2014; 124: 3870–3879.
41. Lazarus HM, Richards SM, Chopra R et al. Central nervous system involvement in
adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia at diagnosis: results from the international
ALL trial MRC UKALL XII/ECOG E2993. Blood 2006; 108: 465–472.

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

Annals of Oncology
42. Ram R, Wolach O, Vidal L et al. Adolescents and young adults with acute
lymphoblastic leukemia have a better outcome when treated with pediatric-inspired
regimens: systematic review and meta-analysis. Am J Hematol 2012; 87: 472–478.
43. Ribera JM, Ribera J, Genescà E. Treatment of adolescent and young adults with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Mediterr J Hematol Infect Dis 2014; 6: e2014052.
44. Burke PW, Douer D. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in adolescents and young
adults. Acta Haematol 2014; 132: 264–273.
45. McNeer JL, Raetz EA. Acute lymphoblastic leukemia in young adults: which
treatment? Curr Opin Oncol 2012; 24: 487–494.
46. Rytting ME, Thomas DA, O’Brien SM et al. Augmented Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster
therapy in adolescents and young adults (AYAs) with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL). Cancer 2014; 120: 3660–3668.
47. Gökbuget N, Beck J, Brandt K et al. Signiﬁcant improvement of outcome in
adolescents and young adults (AYAs) aged 15–35 years with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (ALL) with a pediatric derived adult ALL protocol; results of 1529 AYAs
in 2 consecutive trials of the German Multicenter Study Group For Adult ALL
(GMALL). Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2013; 122: abstr 839.
48. Huguet F, Leguay T, Raffoux E et al. Pediatric-inspired therapy in adults with
Philadelphia chromosome-negative acute lymphoblastic leukemia: the GRAALL2003 study. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 911–918.
49. DeAngelo DJ, Stevenson KE, Dahlberg SE et al. Long-term outcome of a
pediatric-inspired regimen used for adults aged 18–50 years with newly
diagnosed acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia 2015; 29: 526–534.
50. Guru Murthy GS, Venkitachalam R, Mehta P. Trends in survival outcomes of Blineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia in elderly patients: analysis of Surveillance,
Epidemiology, and End Results database. Leuk Lymphoma 2015; 56: 2296–2300.
51. Gökbuget N. How I treat older patients with ALL. Blood 2013; 122: 1366–1375.
52. Ribrag V, Koscielny S, Bouabdallah K et al. Addition of rituximab improves outcome
of HIV negative patients with Burkitt Lymphoma treated with the Lmba protocol:
results of the randomized intergroup (GRAALL-Lysa) LMBA02 protocol. (IGR
sponsored LMBA02, NCT00180882). Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2012;
120: abstr 685.
53. Thomas DA, O’Brien S, Faderl S et al. Chemoimmunotherapy with a modiﬁed
hyper-CVAD and rituximab regimen improves outcome in de novo Philadelphia
chromosome-negative precursor B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin
Oncol 2010; 28: 3880–3889.
54. Kantarjian H, Thomas D, Jorgensen J et al. Inotuzumab ozogamicin, an antiCD22-calecheamicin conjugate, for refractory and relapsed acute lymphocytic
leukaemia: a phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2012; 13: 403–411.
55. Topp MS, Kufer P, Gökbuget N et al. Targeted therapy with the T-cell-engaging
antibody blinatumomab of chemotherapy-refractory minimal residual disease in
B-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients results in high response rate
and prolonged leukemia-free survival. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 2493–2498.
56. Topp MS, Gökbuget N, Stein AS et al. Safety and activity of blinatumomab for adult
patients with relapsed or refractory B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukaemia: a
multicentre, single-arm, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol 2015; 16: 57–66.
57. Brentjens RJ, Davila ML, Riviere I et al. CD19-targeted T cells rapidly induce
molecular remissions in adults with chemotherapy-refractory acute lymphoblastic
leukemia. Sci Transl Med 2013; 5: 177ra38.
58. Grupp SA, Kalos M, Barrett D et al. Chimeric antigen receptor-modiﬁed T cells
for acute lymphoid leukemia. N Engl J Med 2013; 368: 1509–1518.
59. Gökbuget N, Basara N, Baurmann H et al. High single-drug activity of nelarabine
in relapsed T-lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma offers curative option with
subsequent stem cell transplantation. Blood 2011; 118: 3504–3511.
60. DeAngelo DJ, Yu D, Johnson JL et al. Nelarabine induces complete remissions in
adults with relapsed or refractory T-lineage acute lymphoblastic leukemia or
lymphoblastic lymphoma: Cancer and Leukemia Group B study 19801. Blood
2007; 109: 5136–5142.
61. Dombret H, Gabert J, Boiron JM et al. Outcome of treatment in adults with
Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia—results of the
prospective multicenter LALA-94 trial. Blood 2002; 100: 2357–2366.
62. Fielding AK, Rowe JM, Richards SM et al. Prospective outcome data on 267
unselected adult patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia conﬁrms superiority of allogeneic transplantation over
chemotherapy in the pre-imatinib era: results from the International ALL Trial
MRC UKALLXII/ECOG2993. Blood 2009; 113: 4489–4496.

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

clinical practice guidelines
63. Thomas DA, Faderl S, Cortes J et al. Treatment of Philadelphia chromosomepositive acute lymphocytic leukemia with hyper-CVAD and imatinib mesylate.
Blood 2004; 103: 4396–4407.
64. de Labarthe A, Rousselot P, Huguet-Rigal F et al. Imatinib combined with
induction or consolidation chemotherapy in patients with de novo Philadelphia
chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia: results of the GRAAPH2003 study. Blood 2007; 109: 1408–1413.
65. Ribera JM, Oriol A, González M et al. Concurrent intensive chemotherapy and
imatinib before and after stem cell transplantation in newly diagnosed
Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Final results of
the CSTIBES02 trial. Haematologica 2010; 95: 87–95.
66. Fielding AK, Rowe JM, Buck G et al. UKALLXII/ECOG2993: addition of imatinib to
a standard treatment regimen enhances long-term outcomes in Philadelphia
positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 2014; 123: 843–850.
67. Bassan R, Rossi G, Pogliani EM et al. Chemotherapy-phased imatinib pulses
improve long-term outcome of adult patients with Philadelphia chromosomepositive acute lymphoblastic leukemia: Northern Italy Leukemia Group protocol
09/00. J Clin Oncol 2010; 28: 3644–3652.
68. Pfeifer H, Goekbuget N, Völp C et al. Long-term outcome of 335 adult patients
receiving different schedules of imatinib and chemotherapy as front-line
treatment for Philadelphia-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL).
Blood (ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2010; 116: abstr 173.
69. Chalandon Y, Thomas X, Hayette S et al. Randomized study of reduced-intensity
chemotherapy combined with imatinib in adults with Ph-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 2015; 125: 3711–3719.
70. Pfeifer H, Wassmann B, Bethge W et al. Randomized comparison of prophylactic
and minimal residual disease-triggered imatinib after allogeneic stem cell
transplantation for BCR-ABL1-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Leukemia
2013; 27: 1254–1262.
71. Ravandi F, Jorgensen JL, Thomas DA et al. Detection of MRD may predict the
outcome of patients with Philadelphia chromosome-positive ALL treated with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors plus chemotherapy. Blood 2013; 122: 1214–1221.
72. Rousselot P, Coudé MM, Huguet F et al. Dasatinib (Sprycel®) and low intensity
chemotherapy for ﬁrst-line treatment in patients with de novo Philadelphia
positive ALL aged 55 and over: ﬁnal results of the EWALL-Ph-01 Study. Blood
(ASH Annual Meeting Abstracts) 2012; 120: abstr 666.
73. Martinelli G, Iacobucci I, Storlazzi CT et al. IKZF1 (Ikaros) deletions in BCR-ABL1positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia are associated with short disease-free
survival and high rate of cumulative incidence of relapse: a GIMEMA AL WP
report. J Clin Oncol 2009; 27: 5202–5207.
74. van der Veer A, Zaliova M, Mottadelli F et al. IKZF1 status as a prognostic feature
in BCR-ABL1-positive childhood ALL. Blood 2014; 123: 1691–1698.
75. Wassmann B, Pfeifer H, Goekbuget N et al. Alternating versus concurrent
schedules of imatinib and chemotherapy as front-line therapy for Philadelphiapositive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (Ph+ ALL). Blood 2006; 108: 1469–1477.
76. Ribera JM, García O, Montesinos P et al. Treatment of young patients with
Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukaemia using
increased dose of imatinib and deintensiﬁed chemotherapy before allogeneic
stem cell transplantation. Br J Haematol 2012; 159: 78–81.
77. Foà R, Vitale A, Vignetti M et al. Dasatinib as ﬁrst-line treatment for adult patients
with Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood
2011; 118: 6521–6528.
78. Giebel S, Labopin M, Gorin NC et al. Improving results of autologous stem cell
transplantation for Philadelphia-positive acute lymphoblastic leukaemia in the era
of tyrosine kinase inhibitors: a report from the Acute Leukaemia Working Party of
the European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Eur J Cancer 2014;
50: 411–417.
79. Wetzler M, Watson D, Stock W et al. Autologous transplantation for Philadelphia
chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia achieves outcomes similar
to allogeneic transplantation: results of CALGB Study 10001 (Alliance).
Haematologica 2014; 99: 111–115.
80. Ljungman P, Bregni M, Brune M et al. Allogeneic and autologous transplantation
for haematological diseases, solid tumours and immune disorders: current
practice in Europe 2009. Bone Marrow Transplant 2010; 45: 219–234.
81. Dombret H, Cluzeau T, Huguet F, Boissel N. Pediatric-like therapy for adults with
ALL. Curr Hematol Malig Rep 2014; 9: 158–164.

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdw025 | v

clinical practice guidelines
82. Nishiwaki S, Miyamura K, Ohashi K et al. Impact of a donor source on adult
Philadelphia chromosome-negative acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a retrospective
analysis from the Adult Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Working Group of the
Japan Society for Hematopoietic Cell Transplantation. Ann Oncol 2013; 24:
1594–1602.
83. Oliansky DM, Camitta B, Gaynon P et al. The role of cytotoxic therapy with
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in the treatment of pediatric acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: update of the 2005 evidence-based review. ASBMT
Position Statement. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant 2012; 18: 979–981.
84. Marks DI, Woo KA, Zhong X et al. Unrelated umbilical cord blood transplant for
adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia in ﬁrst and second complete remission: a
comparison with allografts from adult unrelated donors. Haematologica 2014;
99: 322–328.
85. Atsuta Y, Suzuki R, Nagamura-Inoue T et al. Disease-speciﬁc analyses of unrelated
cord blood transplantation compared with unrelated bone marrow transplantation in
adult patients with acute leukemia. Blood 2009; 113: 1631–1638.
86. Goldstone AH, Richards SM, Lazarus HM et al. In adults with standard-risk acute
lymphoblastic leukemia, the greatest beneﬁt is achieved from a matched sibling
allogeneic transplantation in ﬁrst complete remission, and an autologous
transplantation is less effective than conventional consolidation/maintenance
chemotherapy in all patients: ﬁnal results of the International ALL Trial (MRC
UKALL XII/ECOG E2993). Blood 2008; 111: 1827–1833.
87. Yanada M, Naoe T, Iida H et al. Myeloablative allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation for Philadelphia chromosome-positive acute lymphoblastic
leukemia in adults: signiﬁcant roles of total body irradiation and chronic graftversus-host disease. Bone Marrow Transplant 2005; 36: 867–872.
88. Mohty M, Labopin M, Volin L et al. Reduced-intensity versus conventional
myeloablative conditioning allogeneic stem cell transplantation for patients with
acute lymphoblastic leukemia: a retrospective study from the European Group for
Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Blood 2010; 116: 4439–4443.
89. Marks DI, Moorman AV, Chilton L et al. The clinical characteristics, therapy and
outcome of 85 adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia and t(4;11)(q21;q23)/
MLL-AFF1 prospectively treated in the UKALLXII/ECOG2993 trial. Haematologica
2013; 98: 945–952.

v | Hoelzer et al.

Annals of Oncology
90. Soverini S, Gnani A, Colarossi S et al. Philadelphia-positive patients who already
harbor imatinib-resistant Bcr-Abl kinase domain mutations have a higher
likelihood of developing additional mutations associated with resistance to
second- or third-line tyrosine kinase inhibitors. Blood 2009; 114: 2168–2171.
91. Fielding AK, Richards SM, Chopra R et al. Outcome of 609 adults after relapse of
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL); an MRC UKALL12/ECOG 2993 study. Blood
2007; 109: 944–950.
92. Weston BW, Hayden MA, Roberts KG et al. Tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy
induces remission in a patient with refractory EBF1-PDGFRB-positive acute
lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: e413–e416.
93. Oriol A, Vives S, Hernández-Rivas JM et al. Outcome after relapse of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in adult patients included in four consecutive riskadapted trials by the PETHEMA Study Group. Haematologica 2010; 95:
589–596.
94. Gökbuget N, Stanze D, Beck J et al. Outcome of relapsed adult lymphoblastic
leukemia depends on response to salvage chemotherapy, prognostic factors, and
performance of stem cell transplantation. Blood 2012; 120: 2032–2041.
95. Tavernier E, Boiron JM, Huguet F et al. Outcome of treatment after ﬁrst relapse in
adults with acute lymphoblastic leukemia initially treated by the LALA-94 trial.
Leukemia 2007; 21: 1907–1914.
96. Kantarjian H, Thomas D, Jorgensen J et al. Results of inotuzumab ozogamicin, a
CD22 monoclonal antibody, in refractory and relapsed acute lymphocytic
leukemia. Cancer 2013; 119: 2728–2736.
97. Specchia G, Pastore D, Carluccio P et al. FLAG-IDA in the treatment of refractory/
relapsed adult acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Ann Hematol 2005; 84: 792–795.
98. Hijiya N, Thomson B, Isakoff MS et al. Phase 2 trial of clofarabine in combination
with etoposide and cyclophosphamide in pediatric patients with refractory or
relapsed acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Blood 2011; 118: 6043–6049.
99. O’Brien S, Schiller G, Lister J et al. High-dose vincristine sulfate liposome
injection for advanced, relapsed, and refractory adult Philadelphia chromosomenegative acute lymphoblastic leukemia. J Clin Oncol 2013; 31: 676–683.
100. Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections
among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:
139–144.

Volume 27 | Supplement 5 | September 2016

