SPECIAL ARTICLE

Acute myeloid leukaemia in adult patients: ESMO Clinical Practice
Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-upy
M. Heuser1, Y. Ofran2,3, N. Boissel4,5, S. Brunet Mauri6,7, C. Craddock8, J. Janssen9, A. Wierzbowska10,11 & C. Buske12, on
behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1

Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany; 2Department of Hematology and Bone Marrow
Transplantation, Rambam Health Care Campus, Haifa; 3The Ruth and Bruce Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa, Israel;
4
Department of Hematology, AP-HP, Saint-Louis Hospital, Paris; 5Université de Paris, Paris, France; 6Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, IIB-Sant Pau, Barcelona; 7Jose
Carreras Leukemia Research Institute, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; 8Centre for Clinical Haematology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham,
UK; 9Department of Hematology, Amsterdam University Medical Centers, location VUmc, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 10Department of Hematology, Medical
University of Lodz, Lodz; 11Copernicus Memorial Hospital, Lodz, Poland; 12Comprehensive Cancer Center, Institute of Experimental Cancer Research, University
Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
Available online 17 March 2020

Key words: guideline, treatment recommendation, dosing information, acute myeloid leukaemia, European LeukaemiaNet, World Health Organization

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) incidence is age dependent,
rising markedly in patients aged 60 years. Ageing of the
European population may therefore contribute to the reported increase in AML incidence in Europe from 3.48 in
1976 to 5.06 patients per 100 000 people in 2013.1 Across
all age groups, the incidence of AML is higher in males than
in females.2 The median age at diagnosis is w70 years.2
The 2016 World Health Organization (WHO) classiﬁcation
identiﬁes distinct categories of AML (see supplementary
Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online).3
Notably, AML is primarily categorised by recurrent genetic
abnormalities, with morphological classiﬁcation reserved
for patients not otherwise classiﬁable.
With advanced age, the relative incidence of AML with
recurrent genetic abnormalities decreases,4 while the relative incidence of other AML categories [such as AML with
myelodysplasia-related changes (MRC-AML) or therapyrelated AML (tAML)] increases with age, comprising about
19% and 7% of AML cases, respectively.5e7
Survival of AML patients in Europe
The prognosis and long-term survival rates of patients <65
years have incrementally improved with time, largely based
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via
Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
y
Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: August 2002, last update
January 2020. This publication supersedes the previously published versiondAnn Oncol. 2013;24(suppl 6):vi138evi143.
0923-7534/© 2020 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

upon improved supportive care and increased utilisation of
allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplantation (alloHCT).
Despite this progress, age-standardised relative 5-year survival for adult patients diagnosed between the years 2000
and 2007 was as low as 17% (16.6e17.7),8 mainly attributable to the minimal progress attained in AML patients
>65 years.
DIAGNOSIS AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Patients suspected of a diagnosis of AML must undergo
prompt cytogenetic and molecular investigations to inform
risk stratiﬁcation and, increasingly, treatment strategies. It
is vital to urgently differentiate acute promyelocytic
leukaemia (APL) from other forms of AML by cytomorphology (dysplastic promyelocytes, binucleated blasts, faggot
cells), signs of hyperﬁbrinolysis and molecular evidence of
PML-RARA fusion.
AML is deﬁned based on morphological inspection
revealing a myeloid blast count of 20% out of 500 bone
marrow (BM) cells,9 although counting fewer cells is sufﬁcient in patients with high blast count.10 Blast counts should
include myeloblasts, monoblasts/promonocytes and megakaryoblasts, but not abnormal monocytes. According to the
latest WHO classiﬁcation, all nucleated cells in the BM serve
as a denominator, even in cases where the BM is enriched
with erythroid precursors.3 Supplementary Table S2, available at Annals of Oncology online, lists all mandatory clinical
and laboratory tests that should be carried out at
presentation.
Past medical history should be carefully reviewed to reveal
signs of an antecedent BM disease and previous exposure
to radiation, chemotherapy (ChT) or leukaemogenic toxins
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

697

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology
such as benzene and organochlorine insecticides. Blood
count results preceding AML diagnosis should be collected,
but even if abnormal, are insufﬁcient to make a deﬁnitive
diagnosis of MRC-AML. A history of a myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS) or a myelodysplastic/myeloproliferative
neoplasm or the presence of one of several MDS-related
cytogenetic abnormalities, or 50% dysplastic cells in at
least two cell lineages (except when combined with NPM1 or
double CEBPA mutations), is required for the diagnosis of
MRC-AML.3 Despite progress in immunophenotyping allowing recognition of dysplasia by aberrant ﬂow cytometry
patterns, cytomorphology remains the gold standard for
diagnosis of dysplasia and MDS.11
The authors recommend a BM aspirate for cytology and
cytochemistry, including Sudan Black B, myeloperoxidase
and esterase staining, immunophenotyping and a trephine
biopsy for histology at diagnosis. Cytochemistry is especially
helpful while cytogenetic and molecular results are awaited
[V, B]. A BM biopsy is mandatory in patients with dry-tap.
Interpretation of morphological changes may be challenging. Presence of an AML-related recurrent genetic abnormality
[e.g. t(8:21)]
overrules
morphological
uncertainties. Multiparameter ﬂow cytometry (MFC), using a
minimum of six colours and following an established ﬂow
cytometry protocol such as the European LeukemiaNet (ELN)
criteria for immunophenotypic leukaemia classiﬁcation,12 is
required for the diagnosis of speciﬁc entities, such as mixed
phenotype acute leukaemia (MPAL), AML not otherwise
speciﬁed (NOS) with minimal differentiation, acute megakaryoblastic leukaemia or blastic plasmacytoid dendritic cell
neoplasm (BPDCN, positive for CD4, CD56, CD123 and
TCL1).13,14 In general, genetic aberrations overrule immunophenotypic changes.
Cytogenetic classiﬁcation should be based on the evaluation of at least 20 metaphases. An abnormal clone is reported only if at least 2/20 cells are identiﬁed as carrying
the same karyotypic abnormality. Karyotype analysis may
miss clinically signiﬁcant cryptic aberrations [e.g. MLL/
KMT2A, inv(16), chromosome 3 aberrations], thus complementary ﬂuorescent in situ hybridisation (FISH) analysis is
recommended and should be considered mandatory when
conventional cytogenetic analysis fails.
Molecular studies to detect the presence of mutations in
the FLT3 gene [internal tandem duplication (ITD) or tyrosine
kinase domain (TKD)] should be carried out immediately to
allow timely initiation of an FLT3 inhibitor. Additional molecular studies to measure the FLT3-ITD allelic ratio (AR),
and detection of NPM1, PML-RARA, RUNX1-RUNX1T1,
CBFB-MYH11 and double CEBPA mutations should be carried out at diagnosis given their prognostic signiﬁcance. The
presence of TP53, RUNX1 and ASXL1 mutations classiﬁes
patients to the adverse ELN risk group; testing is therefore
advised. IDH1 and IDH2 should also be assessed for mutations to identify patients who may beneﬁt from pharmacological inhibitors when these become available in Europe.
If available, next-generation sequencing (NGS) of a panel of
genes commonly mutated in AML provides important
additional prognostic and therapeutic information.
698

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

The new WHO diagnosis of myeloid neoplasms with
germline predisposition is often overlooked in patients with
newly diagnosed AML (see supplementary Table S1, available at Annals of Oncology online). Genetic counselling
is recommended in case of a positive cancer family history
or if an inherited condition potentially associated with
leukaemia has been diagnosed in any relative. There are
also speciﬁc medical conditions that should draw physicians’ awareness regarding potential germline predisposition (supplementary Table S3, available at Annals of
Oncology online).15 All candidates for alloHCT and their
siblings should undergo human leucocyte antigen (HLA)
typing at diagnosis.
Sperm cryopreservation should be systematically proposed before starting ChT, especially in patients due to
undergo alloHCT. In females, ovarian tissue cryopreservation (OTC) may be carried out before haematopoietic cell
transplantation (HCT) if patients are in complete remission
(CR).16 The main concern about the safety of autologous
transplantation of ovarian fragments is possible contamination with leukaemic cells that may lead to AML recurrence.16 Fertility preservation is further discussed in
‘Follow-up, long-term implications and survivorship’ section
in supplementary Material, available at Annals of Oncology
online.

CLASSIFICATION AND RISK ASSESSMENT
The initial assessment of newly diagnosed AML patients
should focus on patient ﬁtness for standard induction and
consolidation ChT. Pre-existing heart, kidney, lung or liver
disease, mental illness, an Eastern Cooperative Oncology
Group (ECOG) performance score 3 and age 75 years are
the strongest predictors for nonrelapse induction-related
mortality and should be considered to determine ineligibility to intensive induction and consolidation ChT [V, B].17
The risk of early death of older AML patients upon induction
ChT can be calculated using seven clinical parameters: body
temperature, age, de novo versus secondary leukaemia,
haemoglobin level, platelet count, ﬁbrinogen level and
serum concentration of lactate dehydrogenase.18 The HCTspeciﬁc comorbidity index (HCT-CI) score predicts
treatment-related mortality in patients treated with induction ChT, as well as transplant outcome.19,20 The ﬁnal decision concerning the role of intensive ChT is taken after
careful consultation between an experienced clinician and
the patient. The presence of extramedullary involvement
should be evaluated clinically, although its prognostic value
is debatable.21 Extramedullary AML involvement has been
found in 17% of patients when using positron emission
tomography (PET).22 In case of any neurological signs or
symptoms, diagnostic lumbar puncture should be carried
out when blasts are reduced in peripheral blood, and cranial
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) [or computed tomography (CT) if MRI is unavailable] should be conducted.
In APL patients, lumbar puncture should be delayed until
recovery of bleeding diathesis.
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

In patients with hypoproliferative disease or those who
can be safely treated with hydroxycarbamide cytoreduction,
it may be feasible to await cytogenetic and molecular genetic results before commencing treatment, if these results
are likely to inﬂuence the choice of therapeutic modalities.
Genetic classiﬁcation of AML is essential to guide clinical
decisions and predict prognosis. The 2017 ELN recommendations identify three risk groups, based on karyotype and
mutational analysis (ELN favourable, intermediate and
adverse risk, see supplementary Table S4, available at
Annals of Oncology online).12 The favourable-risk AML
group comprises all patients in whom a relapse risk is
predicted to be low if treated with induction and consolidation ChT alone. This group includes patients with mutated
NPM1 (NPM1mut) without FLT3-ITD or with FLT3-ITD presenting with AR <0.5, t(8;21)(q22;q22.1)/RUNX1-RUNX1T1,
inv(16)(p13.1q22) or t(16;16)(p13.1;q22)/CBFB-MYH11, or
presenting with double-mutant CEBPA. However, a large
retrospective analysis showed that 3.6% of NPM1mut/FLT3ITDlow patients have adverse cytogenetic aberrations, which
confer an equally poor prognosis as adverse cytogenetics in
NPM1wildtype patients.23
The intermediate-risk AML group comprises patients with
molecular or cytogenetic abnormalities not classiﬁed as
favourable or adverse, and includes patients with NPM1mut
and a high AR of FLT3-ITD.
The adverse-risk AML group includes patients with
complex cytogenetics and other poor-risk genetic aberrations.12 All patients failing to achieve CR after 2 induction
cycles should also be considered as adverse-risk patients,
regardless of genetics/cytogenetics.24 Accurate risk stratiﬁcation plays a critical role in guiding selection of the optimal
postremission approach and of indications for alloHCT in
ﬁrst CR (CR1).25 A comprehensive risk classiﬁcation integrating clinical, genetic and treatment data is available as an
online tool that simulates the individual patient’s risk and
predicts outcome with and without alloHCT (https://cancer.
sanger.ac.uk/aml-multistage/).26

of clinical studies [<5% blasts in the BM, without evidence
of extramedullary disease, platelets 50  109/l and absolute neutrophil count (ANC) 0.5  109/l]. The term CRp,
also used in clinical studies, indicates a CR with platelets
<100  109/l and with ANC recovery 1.0  109/l, but is
now covered by CRi. Morphological leukaemia-free state
(MLFS) consists of <5% BM blasts, absence of blasts with
Auer rods, no extramedullary disease and a lack of haematological recovery of both neutrophils and platelets
where the BM may not be merely aplastic and at least 200
cells should be counted or cellularity at trephine biopsy
should be at least 10%. By comparison, CRi requires
recovery of at least one lineage (either ANC 1.0  109/l or
platelets 100  109/l). BM cellularity <10% should be
deﬁned as BM aplasia in patients without count recovery,
and response assessment repeated after 2e4 weeks. It is
unclear if prognosis differs between patients reaching CRi or
MLFS. In clinical practice, it is recommended to use CRMRD,
CR, CRi and MLFS.
The authors introduce an operational deﬁnition of
refractoriness for patients not achieving CR/CRi/MLFS after
the ﬁrst induction cycle: blast persistence after induction 1
deﬁned by 5% blasts in BM. Consistent with ELN 2017
recommendations, patients are considered primary refractory to induction ChT if they have 5% blasts in BM
after the second induction cycle. It was shown that patients
with >15% BM blasts or <50% reduction of BM blasts after
the ﬁrst induction cycle constitute a group with an equally
poor prognosis as patients with primary refractory disease
and who may beneﬁt from direct alloHCT.24
Relapse is deﬁned by BM blasts 5% in patients who
have been in CR previously, or reappearance of blasts in the
blood or development of extramedullary AML.12,24 Molecular relapse is deﬁned by an increase of the MRD level of
1 log10 between two positive samples in a patient who
previously tested negative.

RESPONSE ASSESSMENT

Morphological enumeration of the blast percentage should
be reﬁned by immunophenotypic or molecular MRD
assessment in patients with <10% blasts.27 ELN recommendations on MRD assessment in AML specify its clinical
use and technical requirements.28 It is recommended to
assess MRD by reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) for patients positive for NPM1mut, RUNX1RUNX1T1, CBFB-MYH11 or PML-RARA fusion genes; w40%
of all AML patients. In the remaining patients, MRD should
be assessed by MFC, which relies on antigens aberrantly
expressed by leukaemic cells that can be found in >90% of
AML patients. Many clinical studies have shown the strong
prognostic impact of MRD, as measured by MFC, with levels
0.1% deﬁned as positive.29e31 Laboratories should report
results of MRD studies according to recently published
guidelines.28
More than 90% of AML patients harbour a molecular
marker that could potentially be used for MRD assessment
by molecular methods. NGS enables simultaneous testing

Deﬁning response and treatment failure
The ELN has deﬁned response categories to induction ChT.12
In addition to conventional CR, CR with incomplete haematological recovery (CRi) and CR without measurable
residual disease (CRMRDe) were proposed (supplementary
Table S5, available at Annals of Oncology online). ELN
MRD recommendations recently proposed CR with molecular persistence at low copy numbers (CRMRDlow) to account
for NPM1 and core binding factor leukaemia patients with
positive MRD at low copy numbers (<100e200 copies/104
ABL copies corresponding to <1%e2% of target to reference gene or variant allele burden), who have completed
their treatment and have a low risk of relapse despite MRD
positivity. The authors recommend handling these patients
the same way as patients with complete molecular remission. In addition, CR with partial haematological recovery
(CRh) is proposed by other groups, to be used in the context
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

Measurable residual disease

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

699

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology
of multiple genes in a single assay,32 and sensitivity approaches 10e4 with recent protocols.33 Residual positivity
for nonclonal haematopoiesis-related gene mutations
(thus excluding DNMT3A, TET2 and ASXL1) after 2 cycles of
induction ChT and before alloHCT predicted AML relapse
in a recent study, which also showed that NGS-MRD and
MFC are complementary techniques.32 However, NGS-MRD
needs thorough standardisation and validation before
recommendation for clinical use.
In APL patients, MRD assessment is recommended at the
end of consolidation treatment, before starting maintenance. In non-high-risk APL patients treated with arsenic
trioxide (ATO) and all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA), all patients
were MRD negative at the end of consolidation.34 If MRD is
negative in these patients, no further MRD assessment is
recommended in view of the very low relapse risk.28 In
high-risk APL patients treated with ChT and ATRA, a variable
proportion of 1%e5% of patients were MRD positive at the
end of consolidation.35 Continuous MRD monitoring is
therefore recommended in high-risk APL patients to predict
impending haematological relapse and thereby prevent
bleeding complications and to allow administration of preemptive therapy at the time of molecular relapse, prior to
the occurrence of haematological relapse.
When to assess response?
The authors recommend performing up to two BM assessments during the ﬁrst cycle of standard induction ChT,
the ﬁrst between day 14 and day 21 as early response
assessment to guide further treatment in case of insufﬁcient response, and the second after recovery of BM to
document CR. BM aspirates are usually sufﬁcient, but
trephine biopsy is recommended if smears are not evaluable. If a ﬁrst response assessment gives an uncertain
result, it is advisable to repeat BM aspirations until a clearer
picture is obtained and the attainment of morphological CR
can be more reliably assessed, at least when the nonattainment of CR would have therapeutic consequences. If a
second induction cycle is applied, BM should be assessed
after haematological recovery or between days 28 and 35 if
haematological recovery is still lacking.
Morphological assessment of BM is recommended before
each consolidation cycle and before alloHCT. After the end
of intensive induction and consolidation treatment, BM
morphology may be repeated every 3 months for 24
months. 3-monthly differential blood counts are recommended for a total of 5 years after the end of treatment.
Assessment of MRD is recommended at diagnosis to
establish the aberrant marker proﬁle, after 2 cycles of ChT
and after the end of treatment. In addition, molecular MRD
may be assessed every 3 months after the end of treatment
from BM or every 4e6 weeks from peripheral blood for 24
months in patients with a molecular marker. Flow cytometric MRD should be assessed from BM, while molecular
MRD should be assessed from both blood and BM.28
In patients treated nonintensively, response should be
assessed at the very least after 4 cycles to diagnose
700

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

refractory disease, and every 3 months thereafter if patients
have no or incomplete recovery of at least one of the three
blood lineages to identify refractory disease.
TREATMENT AND OUTCOME OF NEWLY DIAGNOSED AML
When a diagnosis of AML is made, a number of immediate
decisions must be made. In patients in whom APL is suspected, immediate treatment with ATRA should be initiated, until conﬁrmatory molecular and/or cytogenetic
results are available [V, A]. In patients with non-APL AML
with a white blood cell (WBC) count >100  109/l and
signs of leukostasis, the requirement for cytoreduction
should be considered. This is achieved with 50e60 mg/kg
hydroxycarbamide per day, or, if a patient cannot swallow,
either with intravenous (i.v.) or subcutaneous cytarabine, or
with i.v. daunorubicin. Leukapheresis for hyperleukocytosis
should be avoided in APL patients because it may exacerbate coagulopathy [V, B]. In non-APL AML patients, the
efﬁcacy of leukapheresis to reduce early mortality was
investigated in a meta-analysis and a propensity-matched
study.36 Early mortality was not reduced by leukapheresis
which can thus not be generally recommended [II, C].
Nevertheless, if leukapheresis is applied, it should be
accompanied by hydroxycarbamide, cytarabine or daunorubicin.37 If central nervous system (CNS) involvement is
diagnosed, the patient should be treated with intrathecal
cytarabine twice weekly, with two injections beyond blast
clearance from the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF), except in APL
patients in whom intrathecal treatment should be delayed
until recovery of coagulopathy. Supportive care is essential
for the patient and should include prophylaxis and management of tumour lysis syndrome, infection, hyperﬁbrinolysis, bleeding and eventual thrombosis. There are
scant data to support the use of a gonadotropin-releasing
hormone (GnRH) agonist in female AML patients for prevention of loss of fertility, but it can be used to avoid
menorrhagia.38
Based on eligibility criteria and patient preference, all
AML patients must be assigned to either standard induction
and consolidation ChT or nonintensive treatment (see
‘Classiﬁcation and risk assessment’ section). Patients should
be encouraged to participate in clinical trials whenever
possible.
First-line treatment of AML patients eligible for standard
induction and consolidation ChT
Recommendations for induction ChT. The recommended
ﬁrst-line treatment according to patient subgroups is shown
in Figures 1 and 2. If a patient fulﬁls criteria for two or more
novel drug combinations, the authors recommend following
the algorithm in Figure 1, which prioritises the recommended treatments. Schedules and doses are detailed in
supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology
online. For CBF-AML, the authors recommend 7 days of
cytarabine, 3 days of daunorubicin (7 þ 3) and 1e3 days of
gemtuzumab ozogamicin (GO) in induction 1: 7 þ 3 þ GO
[II, A]. GO is approved for CD33-positive AML patients
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

Figure 1. Treatment algorithm for ﬁrst-line treatment in newly diagnosed AML patients eligible for standard induction and consolidation treatment.
7þ3, 7 days of standard-dose cytarabine and 3 days of daunorubicin; 7þ3þGO, 7 days of standard-dose cytarabine, 3 days of daunorubicin and 1e3 days of gemtuzumab ozogamicin; alloHCT, allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplantation; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; autoHCT, autologous haematopoietic cell transplantation;
CBF, core binding factor; ChT, chemotherapy; CPX-351, liposomal daunorubicin and cytarabine; CR, complete remission; ELN1, 2, 3, European LeukaemiaNet favourable,
intermediate and adverse risk, respectively; GO, gemtuzumab ozogamicin; IDAC, intermediate-dose cytarabine; ITD, internal tandem duplication; MACE, amsacrine,
cytarabine, etoposide; MIDAC, mitoxantrone, intermediate dose cytarabine; mol., molecular; MRC-AML, acute myeloid leukaemia with myelodysplasia-related cytogenetic changes; MRDþ, measurable residual disease-positive; tAML, therapy-related acute myeloid leukaemia; TKD, tyrosine kinase domain.
The subgroups are sorted hierarchically from left to right and the recommendations are also prioritised from left to right.
a
GO if blasts are CD33þ.
b
Cladribine or ﬂudarabine optional in patients 60 years; not approved for AML.
c
GO optional in consolidation 1 and 2 of CD33þ CBF, ELN1 and ELN2 patients; may restrict GO to patients <60e65 years.
d
Alternatively autoHCT.
e
Consider MACE/MIDAC if alloHCT is not possible.39
f
IDAC or autoHCT, if alloHCT is not feasible.

Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

701

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

Figure 2. Treatment algorithm for ﬁrst-line treatment in newly diagnosed AML patients not eligible for standard induction and consolidation treatment.
alloHCT, allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplantation; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; ChT, chemotherapy; HMA, hypomethylating agent; LDAC, low-dose cytarabine;
MDS, myelodysplastic syndrome.

(deﬁned by 30% blasts expressing CD33 in the pivotal
trial) in combination with 7 þ 3 induction ChT in induction
1, but not in induction 2.40,41 Our recommendation is based
primarily on the meta-analysis of ﬁve studies with GO, in
which patients with CBF-AML (RUNX1-RUNX1T1- or CBFBMYH11-positive AML) beneﬁt most from the addition of GO
[GO improved 6-year overall survival (OS) by 20.7% to an OS
of 75.5% in this meta-analysis].42 GO is approved as a
fractionated dose of 3 mg/m2 on days 1, 4 and 7 based on
the ALFA-0701 trial.40 However, the ALFA-0701 trial
contributed only 3.6% of the patients with favourable-risk
cytogenetics to the meta-analysis (9/251 patients).40,42
The majority of patients with favourable-risk cytogenetics
in the meta-analysis received only one dose of 3 mg/m2 GO
during induction cycle 1 (170/251 patients, 67.7%).42 Thus,
the optimal dose for GO remains to be determined. Because
of the risk of hepatic sinusoidal obstruction syndrome, a 2month period was recommended in the ALFA-0701 trial
between the last dose of GO and alloHCT conditioning, but
it is recommended not to delay transplantation if GO was
administered within 8 weeks before alloHCT.
702

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

If tAML or MRC-AML is diagnosed in patients aged 60
years, treatment with liposomal daunorubicin and
cytarabine (CPX-351) is recommended [I, A]. CPX-351 is
approved for AML patients 18 years of age with tAML or
MRC-AML and improved 2-year OS by 18.8% to 31.1% in
patients aged 60 years.43 CPX-351 is approved in Europe
independent of age, although randomised or prospective
data in younger patients have not been published. No
beneﬁt of CPX-351 over 7 þ 3 was found in the subgroup of
patients who had been previously treated with hypomethylating agents (HMAs) for MDS, who should preferably
be treated in clinical trials.43 CPX-351 is also recommended
for FLT3-ITD- or FLT3-TKD-positive tAML or MRC-AML, as
CPX-351 showed good efﬁcacy in this subgroup [median OS
(mOS) 10.25 versus 4.6 months], while very few MRC-AML
and no tAML patients were treated in the RATIFY trial
evaluating the FLT3 inhibitor midostaurin.
For the remaining patients, 7 þ 3 þ midostaurin is recommended if they are FLT3-ITD or FLT3-TKD positive [I, A].
Midostaurin is approved for patients with a FLT3-ITD or
FLT3-TKD mutation (deﬁned by an AR 0.05) in
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

combination with 7 þ 3 induction ChT. The addition of
midostaurin improved OS by 7.1% after 4 years to 51.4%.44
If none of the previous markers is positive, 7 þ 3 induction ChT is generally recommended [II, A]. The addition
of GO to 7 þ 3 may also be considered in younger CD33positive patients with non-CBF-AML with ELN favourable
or intermediate risk [II, C]. In a meta-analysis, GO improved
6-year OS by 5.7% in patients with intermediate-risk cytogenetics to 39.6%. However, GO had no effect on 6-year OS
in patients with adverse-risk cytogenetics (6-year OS 8.9%)
and is not recommended in these patients [II, E].42 A large
randomised study failed to show an event-free survival
(EFS) beneﬁt of additional GO in NPM1mut AML patients
treated with induction ChT and ATRA.45
In the remaining patients with ELN adverse risk, 7 þ 3
ChT is recommended [II, A] with the option to add cladribine or ﬂudarabine to induction ChT in patients up to 60
years (though cladribine and ﬂudarabine are not approved
for this indication) [II, C].46 Upfront treatment with 2 cycles
of ﬂudarabine, cytarabine, granulocyte-colony stimulating
factor and idarubicin (FLAG-Ida) ChT improved relapse-free
survival (RFS), but not OS in younger AML patients and may
be considered in younger high-risk patients [I, C].39 There
are limited data on the treatment of BCR-ABL1-positive
AML. Tyrosine-kinase inhibitor (TKI)-naive patients should
be treated with a second-line TKI with or without induction
ChT [II, A].47 Nonresponding patients should be treated with
another TKI.
After the ﬁrst induction cycle, response should be
assessed between day 14 and day 21. Patients with 5%
blasts in BM after induction 1 (blast persistence) should
receive a second induction cycle, which may consist of the
identical ChT as induction 1 or of a regimen containing
intermediate-dose cytarabine (IDAC), for example, FLAGIda [III, C]. As soon as patients achieve CR/CRi after 1 or
2 induction cycles, they should proceed to consolidation
treatment [II, B].48 Patients not achieving CR/CRi after 2
cycles of induction ChT are deﬁned as primary refractory
and their treatment options are discussed later. The
optimal ChT backbone for induction therapy consisting of
cytarabine and an anthracycline is further discussed in
supplementary Material, available at Annals of Oncology
online.
Consolidation treatment with ChT or autologous HCT.
Patients in CR after induction ChT should undergo consolidation treatment with either ChT, autologous HCT
(autoHCT) or alloHCT [I, A] (Figure 1). There are insufﬁcient
data to give a recommendation on the number of ChT cycles before auto/alloHCT, but the timing of alloHCT is
usually determined by donor availability. Patients in CR with
ELN favourable-risk AML should be consolidated with ChT
[I, A], while autoHCT is an alternative and results in better
RFS, but not OS, than ChT (e.g. in patients with CBF-AML or
double-mutant CEBPA AML) [II, B].49,50 If CBF-AML patients
are consolidated with ChT, 3 cycles with IDAC are recommended [II, B]. In CBF-AML patients, the addition of 3 mg/
m2 GO given on day 1 in consolidation 1 and 2 is optional
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

[II, C], as it remains unclear whether GO in consolidation
contributes to the overall beneﬁt (Figure 1).51
Patients in CR with ELN intermediate- or adverse-risk
AML should undergo alloHCT, if feasible [II, A].52,53 If no
suitable donor is available or if alloHCT is contraindicated,
these patients should undergo consolidation ChT or
autoHCT.49,54 ELN intermediate-risk patients, 40e60 years
old and in CR1, had comparable OS with autoHCT and
alloHCT consolidation54 and better OS with autoHCT
compared with ChT.55 A retrospective study reported better
RFS and OS in patients receiving busulfan/melphalan conditioning before autoHCT compared with busulfan/cyclophosphamide conditioning.56
Patients treated with CPX-351 during induction may
receive up to 2 consolidation cycles with CPX-351 with a
reduced dose and 2 instead of 3 days of application
compared with induction ChT.43 In FLT3-mutated patients,
midostaurin is combined with consolidation ChT and up to 3
consolidation cycles should be applied in patients not undergoing alloHCT.44 If non-CBF-AML patients are treated
with GO during induction, GO is optional in consolidation 1
and 2 in combination with cytarabine (Figure 1 and
supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology
online).40
At least 2 consolidation cycles are recommended in CR
patients not undergoing alloHCT with cytarabine 1.5 g/m2
every 12 hours on days 1e3 in patients <60e65 years
of age, and a dose reduction to 1 g/m2 in patients aged
60e65 years, taking biologic age into consideration
[II, A].57
If alloHCT is not feasible in younger patients with
adverse-risk cytogenetics, consolidation with amsacrine,
cytarabine, etoposide/mitoxantrone, cytarabine (MACE/
MidAC) may be considered (OS 39% versus 0% after a
median follow-up of 5.6 years) [II, B].39
Extramedullary manifestations of AML/myeloid sarcoma
may present at diagnosis and may be the sole manifestation
of AML. If myeloid sarcoma is the only manifestation,
induction ChT followed by alloHCT is recommended
(Figure 1). Individual reports show that local RT can induce
long-term remission in patients with persisting or relapsing
extramedullary AML sites.58 While RT can effectively induce
local control, its effect on long-term outcome is poorly
investigated.59
Consolidation treatment with alloHCT. AML remains the
most frequent indication for alloHCT. Key considerations
before proceeding to alloHCT for consolidation in ﬁrst or
second CR include donor availability and patient ﬁtness.
Eligibility criteria. In CR1, alloHCT is indicated in patients
with intermediate or adverse risk AML and age 75 years
according to recommendations of ELN 2017,12 European
Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT)60 and
American Society of Blood and Marrow Transplantation
(ASBMT)61 [II, A]. BCR-ABL-positive patients should undergo
alloHCT as soon as they achieve remission. In older patients,
comorbidities must be carefully evaluated. In this regard,
the HCT-CI predicts nonrelapse mortality (NRM) and OS and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

703

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology
helps in the selection of patients.19 Likewise, the combination of HCT-CI with the EBMT score translates into NRM
prediction for patients undergoing reduced-intensity conditioning (RIC) alloHCT in CR1.62
Donor selection. Nowadays, almost all patients will have a
donor despite the decreasing number of siblings, as cord
blood and haploidentical transplantation have become
feasible.63 Retrospective data comparing the different
donor sources suggest similar leukaemia-free survival and
OS probabilities in haploidentical transplant recipients who
have received post-transplant cyclophosphamide, although
results differ markedly according to the regimen used.64,65
As patients need to be transplanted in due time,
currently, the ﬁrst priority is to select an HLA-identical
donor (sibling or unrelated donor if the search time is <3
months from diagnosis, 10/10 or 9/10 HLA match required),
with second and third priority being an umbilical cord
blood donor or haploidentical donor, depending on centre
experience and patient’s age.66 In haploidentical transplants
of AML patients aged 40 years, young donors are
preferred, while in patients <40 years of age, neither the
age of the donor nor the kinship has an impact on the
outcome.67
Conditioning regimens. The aim of conditioning is to
eradicate the disease and enable a graft-versus-leukaemia
(GvL) effect with minimal NRM and low risk of relapse.
Currently used myeloablative conditioning (MAC) regimens,
with or without total body irradiation (TBI), are quite similar
in dosing and schedules but are associated with considerable NRM and are therefore usually restricted to patients
55 years of age, if no comorbidities are present.68 In
younger ﬁt patients, the myeloablative ﬂudarabine/
busulfan (Flu/Bu4) regimen is associated with less toxicity
than busulfan/cyclophosphamide (Bu/Cy).69 Cy/TBI myeloablative regimens have been extensively used as a conditioning regimen in high-risk AML. However, there are no
convincing data to demonstrate their superiority to a Bu/Cy
or Flu/Bu4 regimen, both of which are widely utilised.70
A TBI-based myeloablative regimen should be considered
in rare patients with evidence of CNS disease at presentation or a myeloid sarcoma. In contrast, RIC regimens use
heterogeneous doses and schedules and rely more on the
GvL effect. Despite large meta-analyses, it is currently not
possible to deﬁne the optimal conditioning regimen for
AML. In general, MAC is recommended for patients aged
55 years with HCT-CI 2 [I, A] and RIC for all other patients [II, B].71 Graft-versus-host disease (GvHD) prophylaxis
is a critical part of alloHCT and the recommendations for a
standardised prophylaxis and treatment of GvHD by the
EBMT-ELN working group on GvHD should be followed.72
Maintenance treatment after intensive ChT or alloHCT.
Maintenance treatment is approved only for midostaurin in
patients who are in CR after induction and consolidation
ChT (but not after alloHCT). Exploratory analysis of the
RATIFY trial failed to clarify whether midostaurin maintenance contributes to the OS beneﬁt of midostaurin73; based
704

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

on expert opinion, this treatment after ChT consolidation is
not recommended [IV, D]. Importantly, midostaurin maintenance should not replace alloHCT in transplant candidates. Maintenance treatment with subcutaneous
azacitidine in older AML patients who obtained CR after
induction and consolidation treatment improved diseasefree survival but not OS in a randomised study.74
Recently, maintenance treatment with oral azacitidine
(CC-486) showed improved survival in patients 55 years of
age who obtained CR after intensive ChT, but is currently
not approved.75
The use of maintenance and pre-emptive treatment after alloHCT remains controversial. Therapeutic options
include TKIs for FLT3-ITD-mutated AML, HMAs or donor
lymphocyte infusions (DLIs). In a small randomised trial,
maintenance with sorafenib after alloHCT in FLT3mut patients improved 2-year RFS in patients who were not
pretreated with an FLT3 inhibitor.76 The results of ongoing
larger randomised trials are required before maintenance
sorafenib or midostaurin can be recommended after
alloHCT in patients with FLT3-ITD-positive AML.77
A phase I/II dose-ﬁnding study of oral azacitidine (CC-486)
maintenance treatment after alloHCT in patients with AML
or MDS showed encouraging results with a 1-year relapse/
progression rate of 21%.78 It is unclear whether prophylactic
HMA treatment after alloHCT is beneﬁcial to prevent
relapse, as it may increase toxicity without therapeutic
beneﬁt in patients who can be cured with alloHCT alone.
Pre-emptive treatment when mixed chimerism (MC) or
MRD appears could prevent or delay relapse in patients
with AML and MDS.79 Currently, maintenance with HMAs
cannot be recommended outside of clinical trials [V, D]. In
BCR-ABL-positive patients, TKI maintenance after alloHCT is
recommended [V, B].
DLI, as pre-emptive treatment in patients with MRD or MC,
or as prophylactic treatment before relapse or progression, is
increasingly used in AML after alloHCT.80 This is due to the
poor efﬁcacy of therapeutic DLIs when overt relapse occurs
and increased use of RIC allografts. So far, there is no clear
recommendation for the use of DLIs and important questions
remain, such as time of administration, dose and use of DLIs
as prophylactic or pre-emptive treatment.
First-line treatment of AML patients not eligible for
standard induction and consolidation ChT
The HMAs azacitidine and decitabine are currently the ﬁrst
choice in newly diagnosed unﬁt AML patients [II, B]
[(Figure 2); see supplementary Table S6, available at Annals
of Oncology online, for dosing].81,82 While venetoclax in
combination with azacitidine, decitabine or low-dose cytarabine (LDAC) is approved in the United States and Israel,83
and glasdegib in combination with LDAC is approved in the
United States for newly diagnosed AML patients aged 75
years or those with comorbidities that preclude use of
intensive induction ChT,84 their approval is pending in most
European countries. Although venetoclax in combination
with an HMA or LDAC is considered to be superior to
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

currently available ﬁrst-line treatments for AML patients
ineligible for standard induction ChT based on promising
preliminary data, results of ongoing randomised trials are
awaited before its use can be recommended with conﬁdence
[III, A].
A prospective randomised study comparing 5- and 10-day
decitabine treatment in newly diagnosed AML patients
found almost identical CR and early mortality rates, EFS and
OS between the two arms, which also extended to the
subgroup of TP53mut patients.85 Thus, if decitabine is chosen, it is recommended to follow the 5-day schedule [II, B].
No predictive markers are known to recommend one HMA
over the other. HMA treatment is usually continued until
disease progression or intolerance but may be terminated
after at least 4 consecutive cycles if the patient has not
responded or derived clinical beneﬁt. Given the moderate
effects of HMAs, LDAC remains an alternative to HMAs in
the ﬁrst-line treatment of AML patients who are ineligible
for standard induction and consolidation ChT, except in
patients with adverse-risk cytogenetics, where LDAC has
very poor activity [II, B]. First-line treatment with LDAC
results in mOS of w5 months.86 A practical beneﬁt of LDAC
is its longer stability after being dissolved, allowing
administration at home unlike azacitidine and decitabine.
Patients with MDS progressing to AML during treatment
with azacitidine constitute a signiﬁcant therapeutic challenge. Current evidence shows that 21%e43% AML patients
pretreated with HMAs and who received HMA and venetoclax achieved a response.87,88 MDS patients progressing
to AML under HMA treatment may be similarly sensitised to
HMA by the addition of venetoclax [III, B]; LDAC or best
supportive care with either 6-mercaptopurine or low-dose
melphalan or hydroxycarbamide are remaining options, if
no clinical trial is available [III, C].
Patients should be treated for at least 4 cycles and, in
case of clinical beneﬁt, should continue until progression
or intolerance. Patients responding to initial treatment
should be re-evaluated regarding their ability to undergo
alloHCT using RIC, which may cure a proportion of these
patients.
TREATMENT OF PRIMARY REFRACTORY AND RELAPSED
AML
Roughly 10%e20% of younger and 50% of older AML patients do not achieve CR after at least two courses of
intensive induction therapy, and 50%e70% of patients who
obtain CR will relapse.12 The prognosis of primary refractory
and relapsed AML patients remains poor and treatment is
challenging. A primary consideration in the therapeutic
approach of refractory or relapsed AML patients should be
their suitability for intensive ChT and alloHCT. Mutation
analysis for FLT3 should be repeated in relapsed patients, as
gilteritinib has been approved in Europe and the United
States in the relapse setting of FLT3-ITD- and FLT3-TKDmutated patients.89 Mutation analysis for IDH1/2 will
become relevant once the IDH1/2mut inhibitors ivosidenib/
enasidenib become available in Europe.
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

Primary refractory and relapsed AML patients eligible for
standard ChT and alloHCT
The outcome of patients with primary refractory AML is
dismal, with no realistic prospect of long-term survival after
salvage ChT90; thus, alloHCT is the most effective treatment
option providing long-term survival in 20%e30% of patients
[III, B] (Figure 3).91 Outcomes for patients with primary
refractory AML may be better with a sequential transplant
conditioning regimen, in which a combination of cytarabine/amsacrine ChT is followed by a ﬂudarabine-based RIC
regimen (FLAMSA-RIC) [III, C].92 If a family or unrelated
donor is not immediately available, either a haploidentical
or cord blood donor alloHCT should be offered promptly.
For ﬁt patients with relapsed AML, the recommended
treatment is salvage ChT followed by alloHCT [III, B]
(Figure 3). Breems et al. developed a simpliﬁed prognostic
score to predict the efﬁcacy of salvage ChT in relapsed AML
patients based on the length of the relapse-free interval
after CR1, cytogenetics at diagnosis, age at relapse and
previous alloHCT.93 Many salvage regimens have been
studied in an effort to improve CR rates in patients with
relapsed AML. Commonly used salvage regimens are summarised in supplementary Table S7, available at Annals of
Oncology online.94 Because of the limited long-term effects,
enrolment in clinical trials is strongly recommended. The
authors recommend a salvage protocol based on high- or
intermediate-dose cytarabine in combination with an
anthracycline and, optionally, a purine analogue (e.g. FLAGIda) [II, B]. Patients with late relapse (12 months after the
end of ﬁrst-line treatment) may also beneﬁt from retreatment with the previously successful induction regimen.
AlloHCT should be considered for all ﬁt, eligible patients
who entered second CR [III, B], as it represents the only
chance for long-term survival.95,96 A second alloHCT or DLI
may induce long-term survival in patients with relapse after
the ﬁrst alloHCT, particularly for those relapsing later than 5
months [IV, C].97 A Center for International Blood and
Marrow Transplant Research (CIBMTR) retrospective study
found survival probabilities at 3 years to be 4%, 12%, 26%
and 38% for patients relapsing within 6 months, 6e24
months, 2e3 years or >3 years after alloHCT.98 Intensive
ChT can induce a CR in a proportion of patients relapsing
after an alloHCT, but is associated with considerable toxicity.
HMAs, notably azacytidine, represent an important and
less toxic alternative, particularly in patients relapsing
>6 months after alloHCT, as demonstrated in a recent large
EBMT study.99 Relapse of FLT3-mutated AML after alloHCT
has a poor prognosis, but encouraging results have been
reported using both gilteritinib and quizartinib as monotherapy.89,100 Patients achieving a CR can proceed to a
second alloHCT or DLI with potentially curative intent.
Primary refractory and relapsed AML patients not eligible
for standard ChT
The therapeutic options in unﬁt AML patients aim at controlling disease progression and minimising treatment-related
mortality (TRM). In FLT3-mutated patients, the authors
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

705

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

Figure 3. Treatment algorithm for second-line treatment in relapsed/refractory AML patients.
alloHCT, allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation; AML, acute myeloid leukaemia; BSC, best supportive care; ChT, chemotherapy; CR, complete remission; CRi,
complete remission with incomplete haematological recovery; DLI, donor lymphocyte infusion; HMA, hypomethylating agent; LDAC, low-dose cytarabine; PR, partial
remission; R/R, relapsed/refractory; SD, stable disease.

recommend treatment with gilteritinib, which showed a
favourable response rate and improved OS compared with
ChT (mOS 9.3 versus 5.6 months) [I, A].89 Quizartinib also
showed a survival beneﬁt in relapsed/refractory FLT3-ITDmutated patients but was not approved in Europe (mOS 6.2
versus 4.7 months).100 If the patient is considered ineligible,
azacitidine or decitabine should be applied if LDAC was given
in ﬁrst line, and LDAC may be applied in favourable- and
intermediate-risk patients if an HMA was given initially [IV, B]
(Figure 3). In a cohort of 655 relapsed/refractory AML patients
treated with azacitidine or decitabine, the CR/CRi rate was
found to be 16.3% with mOS of 6.7 months, with no differences observed between agents.101 If available, venetoclax in
combination with HMA or LDAC is a promising second-line
treatment with overall response rates of 21%e43%.87,88 In
IDH1/IDH2mut patients, inhibitors ivosidenib102 and enasidenib,103 respectively, show considerable activity as single
agents in relapsed/refractory patients, and will expand the
treatment options once they become available. Differentiation syndrome occurs in up to 20% of patients treated
with IDH-inhibitor monotherapy or when combined with
HMAs and requires close monitoring and immediate initiation of dexamethasone treatment when suspected.104
Eligibility for RIC alloHCT should be re-evaluated for patients who achieved CR. GO is not approved in Europe for
refractory and relapsed AML patients and currently is not
recommended as a salvage treatment. Older patients with
hypocellular marrow may beneﬁt from oral low-dose
melphalan [V, C].105 Best supportive care with cytoreductive treatment (hydroxycarbamide, 6-mercaptopurine)
706

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

should be offered for patients who cannot tolerate or who
decline other treatments.
TREATMENT OF APL PATIENTS
These recommendations largely follow the ELN APL treatment guidelines that were updated in 2019.106 Treatment of
APL patients should be centralised in hospitals with proven
experience in APL treatment and haematological intensive
care. Non-high-risk APL patients deﬁned by a WBC count
10  109/l should be treated with ATO and ATRA (Figure 4
and supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of
Oncology online) [I, A]. Non-high-risk patients continuously
receive ATO/ATRA until day 28, or up to day 60 if no CR/CRi
is achieved by day 28. Missed doses due to adverse events
should be appended to this schedule. As all patients will
likely achieve CR, it is sufﬁcient to repeat BM assessment
only after haematological recovery. Patients with CR/CRi are
given time for neutrophil and platelet recovery without
treatment. Consolidation treatment with ATO/ATRA should
be started as soon as possible after count recovery. Four
8-week consolidation cycles with ATO/ATRA are recommended (supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of
Oncology online), providing excellent cure rates to these
patients.34,107 Comparable cure rates can be also achieved
with a more condensed infusion scheme of ATO.108 If ATO is
not available/affordable for ﬁrst-line treatment, the classical
combination of ATRA and anthracycline-based ChT is still an
acceptable option, which however requires 2-year maintenance therapy with methotrexate and 6-mercaptopurine.
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

Figure 4. Treatment algorithm for ﬁrst-line treatment in newly diagnosed APL patients.
6MP, 6 mercaptopurine; AIDA, all-trans retinoic acid and idarubicin; alloHCT, allogeneic haematopoietic cell transplantation; autoHCT, autologous haematopoietic cell
transplantation; APL, acute promyelocytic leukaemia; AraC, cytarabine; ATO, arsenic trioxide; ATRA, all-trans retinoic acid; ChT, chemotherapy; CR, complete remission;
IDAC, intermediate-dose cytarabine; mol., molecular; MRDþ, measurable residual disease-positive; MTX, methotrexate; WBC, white blood cell.
a
Deﬁned by a WBC count >10  109/l.
b
Alternatively ATO/ATRA/ChT, but ATO is not approved for high-risk APL.

Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

707

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

Figure 5. Treatment algorithm for second-line treatment in relapsed/refractory APL patients.
AIDA, all-trans-retinoic acid and idarubicin; alloHCT, allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation; APL, acute promyelocytic leukaemia; ATO, arsenic trioxide; ATRA, alltrans-retinoic acid; autoHCT, autologous hematopoietic cell transplantation; ChT, chemotherapy; CR, complete remission; CRi, complete remission with incomplete
haematological recovery; GO, gemtuzumab ozogamicin; MRD, measurable residual disease; PR, partial remission; R/R, relapsed/refractory.
a
Early relapse is deﬁned as relapse within 24 months after the end of the primary treatment.
b
GO  ATO/ATRA in patients who are unﬁt for alloHCT; GO is not approved in this indication.

APL high-risk patients deﬁned by a WBC count >10 
109/l may be treated with either ATRA plus ATO combined
with an anthracycline (while ATO is not approved for highrisk APL) or with conventional ATRA plus anthracyclinebased ChT [e.g. ATRA and idarubicin (AIDA)] [II, A] (see
supplementary Table S6, available at Annals of Oncology
708

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

online). In the AIDA regimen, the induction and consolidation treatments are followed by a 2-year maintenance
phase.109 The combination of ATRA and ATO with idarubicin
during induction followed by ATRA and ATO for consolidation and 2-year maintenance of ATRA, 6-mercaptopurine
and methotrexate in a single-arm phase II trial resulted in
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

excellent outcomes also in high-risk patients, suggesting
good activity in this patient population.110
To prevent differentiation syndrome, patients should
be treated prophylactically with steroids as soon as they
receive ATRA (e.g. prednisolone 0.5 mg/kg/day) and with
hydroxycarbamide as soon as the WBC count increases above
5e10  109/l. Bleeding is the most frequent cause of early
death in APL patients. Adequate support is recommended with
ﬁbrinogen or fresh-frozen plasma and platelets to maintain
levels above 1.0e1.5 g/l and >30e50  109/l, respectively.
MRD assessment in APL patients is discussed in the
‘Response assessment’ section.
Patients relapsing after ATRA and ChT or relapsing >24
months after the end of ATO/ATRA treatment should receive
ATO/ATRA for reinduction and consolidation until achievement of second molecular remission [IV, B]. In the unlikely
event of an early relapse (within 24 months) after treatment
with ATO/ATRA, we recommend ATRA with ChT or, in patients not eligible for ChT, GO with or without ATO/ATRA [IV,
B] (Figure 5).111,112 For patients in second molecular CR,
autoHCT is recommended for consolidation [IV, B].113 For
MRD-positive or refractory patients after salvage treatment,
alloHCT is the preferred consolidation treatment. If alloHCT is
not feasible, treatment with GO, with or without ATO/ATRA,
may be considered (Figure 5) [IV, C]. The CNS is involved in
10% of relapsing patients. Treatment of patients with CNS
involvement should include ATO, which crosses the bloodbrain barrier to some extent (CSF ATO levels were 17.7% of
plasma levels).114 Because of the haemorrhagic risk, however, lumbar puncture should not be carried out in patients
with haematological relapse and should be postponed in
these cases to the end of induction.

PERSONALISED MEDICINE
AML has long been the paradigm disease for personalised
treatment approaches. Current and prospective uses of
biomarkers for personalised diagnosis, prognostication and
treatment are shown in supplementary Table S8, available
at Annals of Oncology online.

METHODOLOGY
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in
accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures
for Clinical Practice Guidelines development http://www.
esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. The
relevant literature has been selected by the expert authors.
A summary of recommendations is shown in supplementary
Table S9, available at Annals of Oncology online. Levels of
evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied
using the system shown in supplementary Table S10,
available at Annals of Oncology online.115 Statements
without grading were considered justiﬁed standard clinical
practice by the experts and the ESMO Faculty. This manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review
process.
Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
We thank Francesco Lo Coco and Francesco Buccisano for
their insight and support in drafting these guidelines. The
ESMO Guidelines Committee would like to thank the ESMO
Faculty and other experts who provided critical reviews of
these ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines.
FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation
of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by
ESMO from central funds.
DISCLOSURE
MH has reported honoraria from Novartis, Pﬁzer, priME
Oncology, consulting or advisory role for AbbVie, Bayer
Pharma AG, Daiichi Sankyo, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Novartis
and Pﬁzer, research funding from Astellas, Bayer Pharma
AG, BerGenBio, Daiichi Sankyo, Karyopharm, Novartis, Pﬁzer
and Roche; YO has reported consulting or advisory role for
Amgen, Novartis, AbbVie, Pﬁzer, Medison and Roche; NB
has reported consulting or advisory role for Amgen, BristolMyers Squibb, Celgene, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Novartis,
Pﬁzer and Sanoﬁ, research funding from Amgen, BristolMyers Squibb, Novartis and Jazz Pharmaceuticals; SBM
has reported consulting or advisory role for Novartis and
Celgene; CC has reported consulting or advisory role for
AbbVie, Celgene, Daiichi-Sankyo, Jazz Pharmaceuticals and
Novartis, research funding from Celgene; JJ has reported
consulting or advisory role for AbbVie, Daiichi Sankyo,
Incyte Corporation, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Novartis and
Pﬁzer, research funding from Bristol-Myers-Squibb, Daiichi
Sankyo, Janssen Global Services, Jazz Pharmaceuticals,
Novartis and Takeda Oncology; AW has reported consulting
or advisory role for AbbVie, Celgene, Janssen, Jazz Pharmaceuticals, Novartis and Pﬁzer, research funding from Jazz
Pharma; CB has reported research funding from Bayer,
Roche and Janssen, honoraria from Roche, Janssen, AbbVie
and Celgene.
REFERENCES
1. Roman E, Smith A, Appleton S, et al. Myeloid malignancies in the
real-world: occurrence, progression and survival in the UK’s population-based Haematological Malignancy Research Network 2004-15.
Cancer Epidemiol. 2016;42:186e198.
2. Juliusson G, Abrahamsson J, Lazarevic V, et al. Prevalence and characteristics of survivors from acute myeloid leukemia in Sweden.
Leukemia. 2017;31:728e731.
3. Arber DA, Orazi A, Hasserjian R, et al. The 2016 revision to the World
Health Organization classiﬁcation of myeloid neoplasms and acute
leukemia. Blood. 2016;127:2391e2405.
4. Bullinger L, Dohner K, Dohner H. Genomics of acute myeloid leukemia diagnosis and pathways. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:934e946.
5. Granfeldt Ostgard LS, Medeiros BC, Sengeløv H, et al. Epidemiology
and clinical signiﬁcance of secondary and therapy-related acute
myeloid leukemia: a national population-based cohort study. J Clin
Oncol. 2015;33:3641e3649.
6. Hulegardh E, Nilsson C, Lazarevic V, et al. Characterization and
prognostic features of secondary acute myeloid leukemia in a population-based setting: a report from the Swedish Acute Leukemia
Registry. Am J Hematol. 2015;90:208e214.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

709

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology
7. Kayser S, Döhner K, Krauter J, et al. The impact of therapy-related
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) on outcome in 2853 adult patients
with newly diagnosed AML. Blood. 2011;117:2137e2145.
8. De Angelis R, Minicozzi P, Sant M, et al. Survival variations by country
and age for lymphoid and myeloid malignancies in Europe 20002007: results of EUROCARE-5 population-based study. Eur J Cancer.
2015;51:2254e2268.
9. Vardiman JW, Thiele J, Arber DA, et al. The 2008 revision of the World
Health Organization (WHO) classiﬁcation of myeloid neoplasms and
acute leukemia: rationale and important changes. Blood. 2009;114:
937e951.
10. Abdulrahman AA, Patel KH, Yang T, et al. Is a 500-cell count necessary
for bone marrow differentials?: a proposed analytical method for
validating a lower cutoff. Am J Clin Pathol. 2018;150:84e91.
11. Bene MC, Nebe T, Bettelheim P, et al. Immunophenotyping of acute
leukemia and lymphoproliferative disorders: a consensus proposal of
the European LeukemiaNet Work Package 10. Leukemia. 2011;25:
567e574.
12. Dohner H, Estey E, Grimwade D, et al. Diagnosis and management of
AML in adults: 2017 ELN recommendations from an international
expert panel. Blood. 2017;129:424e447.
13. van Dongen JJ, Lhermitte L, Böttcher S, et al. EuroFlow antibody
panels for standardized n-dimensional ﬂow cytometric immunophenotyping of normal, reactive and malignant leukocytes. Leukemia.
2012;26:1908e1975.
14. Johansson U, Bloxham D, Couzens S, et al. Guidelines on the use of
multicolour ﬂow cytometry in the diagnosis of haematological neoplasms. British Committee for Standards in Haematology. Br J Haematol. 2014;165:455e488.
15. Godley LA, Shimamura A. Genetic predisposition to hematologic
malignancies: management and surveillance. Blood. 2017;130:424e
432.
16. Shapira M, Raanani H, Cohen Y, Meirow D. Fertility preservation in
young females with hematological malignancies. Acta Haematol.
2014;132:400e413.
17. Ferrara F, Barosi G, Venditti A, et al. Consensus-based deﬁnition of
unﬁtness to intensive and non-intensive chemotherapy in acute
myeloid leukemia: a project of SIE, SIES and GITMO group on a new
tool for therapy decision making. Leukemia. 2013;27:997e999.
18. Krug U, Röllig C, Koschmieder A, et al. Complete remission and early
death after intensive chemotherapy in patients aged 60 years or
older with acute myeloid leukaemia: a web-based application for
prediction of outcomes. Lancet. 2010;376:2000e2008.
19. Sorror ML, Storer BE, Fathi AT, et al. Development and validation of a
novel acute myeloid leukemia-composite model to estimate risks of
mortality. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3:1675e1682.
20. Giles FJ, Borthakur G, Ravandi F, et al. The haematopoietic cell transplantation comorbidity index score is predictive of early death and
survival in patients over 60 years of age receiving induction therapy for
acute myeloid leukaemia. Br J Haematol. 2007;136:624e627.
21. Ganzel C, Manola J, Douer D, et al. Extramedullary disease in adult
acute myeloid leukemia is common but lacks independent signiﬁcance: analysis of patients in ECOG-ACRIN Cancer Research Group
Trials, 1980-2008. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34:3544e3553.
22. Stölzel F, Lüer T, Löck S, et al. The prevalence of extramedullary AML
detected by 18-FDG/PET-CT: results from the prospective PET-AML
Trial. Blood. 2014;124:2270.
23. Angenendt L, Röllig C, Montesinos P, et al. Chromosomal abnormalities and prognosis in NPM1-mutated acute myeloid leukemia: a
pooled analysis of individual patient data from nine international
cohorts. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(29):2632e2642.
24. Ferguson P, Hills RK, Grech A, et al. An operational deﬁnition of primary refractory acute myeloid leukemia allowing early identiﬁcation
of patients who may beneﬁt from allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Haematologica. 2016;101:1351e1358.
25. Cornelissen JJ, Gratwohl A, Schlenk RF, et al. The European LeukemiaNet AML Working Party consensus statement on allogeneic HSCT
for patients with AML in remission: an integrated-risk adapted
approach. Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2012;9:579e590.

710

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

26. Gerstung M, Papaemmanuil E, Martincorena I, et al. Precision
oncology for acute myeloid leukemia using a knowledge bank
approach. Nat Genet. 2017;49:332e340.
27. Freeman SD, Hills RK, Russell NH, et al. Induction response criteria in
acute myeloid leukaemia: implications of a ﬂow cytometric measurable residual disease negative test in refractory adults. Br J Haematol.
2019;186(1):130e133.
28. Schuurhuis GJ, Heuser M, Freeman S, et al. Minimal/measurable residual disease in AML: a consensus document from the European
LeukemiaNet MRD Working Party. Blood. 2018;131:1275e1291.
29. Buccisano F, Maurillo L, Spagnoli A, et al. Cytogenetic and molecular
diagnostic characterization combined to postconsolidation minimal
residual disease assessment by ﬂow cytometry improves risk stratiﬁcation in adult acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2010;116:2295e
2303.
30. Zeijlemaker W, Kelder A, Oussoren-Brockhoff YJ, et al. Peripheral
blood minimal residual disease may replace bone marrow minimal
residual disease as an immunophenotypic biomarker for impending
relapse in acute myeloid leukemia. Leukemia. 2016;30:708e715.
31. Freeman SD, Hills RK, Virgo P, et al. Measurable residual disease at
induction redeﬁnes partial response in acute myeloid leukemia and
stratiﬁes outcomes in patients at standard risk without NPM1 mutations. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36:1486e1497.
32. Jongen-Lavrencic M, Grob T, Hanekamp D, et al. Molecular minimal
residual disease in acute myeloid leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2018;378:
1189e1199.
33. Thol F, Gabdoulline R, Liebich A, et al. Measurable residual disease
(MRD) monitoring by NGS before allogeneic hematopoietic cell
transplantation in AML. Blood. 2018;132:1703e1713.
34. Platzbecker U, Avvisati G, Cicconi L, et al. Improved outcomes with
retinoic acid and arsenic trioxide compared with retinoic acid and
chemotherapy in non-high-risk acute promyelocytic leukemia: ﬁnal
results of the randomized Italian-German APL0406 Trial. J Clin Oncol.
2017;35:605e612.
35. Grimwade D, Jovanovic JV, Hills RK, et al. Prospective minimal residual disease monitoring to predict relapse of acute promyelocytic
leukemia and to direct pre-emptive arsenic trioxide therapy. J Clin
Oncol. 2009;27:3650e3658.
36. Oberoi S, Lehrnbecher T, Phillips B, et al. Leukapheresis and low-dose
chemotherapy do not reduce early mortality in acute myeloid leukemia hyperleukocytosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Leuk
Res. 2014;38:460e468.
37. Rollig C, Ehninger G. How I treat hyperleukocytosis in acute myeloid
leukemia. Blood. 2015;125:3246e3252.
38. Demeestere I, Brice P, Peccatori FA, et al. No evidence for the beneﬁt
of gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist in preserving ovarian
function and fertility in lymphoma survivors treated with chemotherapy: ﬁnal long-term report of a prospective randomized trial. J
Clin Oncol. 2016;34:2568e2574.
39. Burnett AK, Russell NH, Hills RK, et al. Optimization of chemotherapy
for younger patients with acute myeloid leukemia: results of the
medical research council AML15 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:3360e
3368.
40. Castaigne S, Pautas C, Terré C, et al. Effect of gemtuzumab ozogamicin
on survival of adult patients with de-novo acute myeloid leukaemia
(ALFA-0701): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study. Lancet.
2012;379:1508e1516.
41. Lambert J, Pautas C, Terré C, et al. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin for de
novo acute myeloid leukemia: ﬁnal efﬁcacy and safety updates from
the open-label, phase III ALFA-0701 trial. Haematologica. 2019;104:
113e119.
42. Hills RK, Castaigne S, Appelbaum FR, et al. Addition of gemtuzumab
ozogamicin to induction chemotherapy in adult patients with acute
myeloid leukaemia: a meta-analysis of individual patient data from
randomised controlled trials. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:986e996.
43. Lancet JE, Uy GL, Cortes JE, et al. CPX-351 (cytarabine and daunorubicin) liposome for injection versus conventional cytarabine plus
daunorubicin in older patients with newly diagnosed secondary acute
myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36:2684e2692.

Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

44. Stone RM, Mandrekar SJ, Sanford BL, et al. Midostaurin plus
chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia with a FLT3 mutation. N
Engl J Med. 2017;377:454e464.
45. Schlenk RF, Paschka P, Krzykalla J, et al. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin in
NPM1-mutated acute myeloid leukemia (AML): results from the
prospective randomized AMLSG 09-09 phase-III study. Blood.
2018;132:81.
46. Holowiecki J, Grosicki S, Giebel S, et al. Cladribine, but not ﬂudarabine, added to daunorubicin and cytarabine during induction prolongs survival of patients with acute myeloid leukemia: a multicenter,
randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:2441e2448.
47. Baccarani M, Deininger MW, Rosti G, et al. European LeukemiaNet
recommendations for the management of chronic myeloid leukemia:
2013. Blood. 2013;122:872e884.
48. Rowe JM, Kim HT, Cassileth PA, et al. Adult patients with acute
myeloid leukemia who achieve complete remission after 1 or 2 cycles
of induction have a similar prognosis: a report on 1980 patients
registered to 6 studies conducted by the Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group. Cancer. 2010;116:5012e5021.
49. Vellenga E, van Putten W, Ossenkoppele GJ, et al. Autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation for acute myeloid leukemia.
Blood. 2011;118:6037e6042.
50. Schlenk RF, Taskesen E, van Norden Y, et al. The value of allogeneic
and autologous hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in prognostically favorable acute myeloid leukemia with double mutant CEBPA.
Blood. 2013;122:1576e1582.
51. Burnett AK, Hills RK, Milligan D, et al. Identiﬁcation of patients with
acute myeloblastic leukemia who beneﬁt from the addition of gemtuzumab ozogamicin: results of the MRC AML15 trial. J Clin Oncol.
2011;29:369e377.
52. Cornelissen JJ, van Putten WL, Verdonck LF, et al. Results of a
HOVON/SAKK donor versus no-donor analysis of myeloablative HLAidentical sibling stem cell transplantation in ﬁrst remission acute
myeloid leukemia in young and middle-aged adults: beneﬁts for
whom? Blood. 2007;109:3658e3666.
53. Koreth J, Schlenk R, Kopecky KJ, et al. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for acute myeloid leukemia in ﬁrst complete remission:
systematic review and meta-analysis of prospective clinical trials.
JAMA. 2009;301:2349e2361.
54. Cornelissen JJ, Versluis J, Passweg JR, et al. Comparative therapeutic
value of post-remission approaches in patients with acute myeloid
leukemia aged 40-60 years. Leukemia. 2015;29:1041e1050.
55. Cornelissen JJ, Blaise D. Hematopoietic stem cell transplantation for
patients with AML in ﬁrst complete remission. Blood. 2016;127:62e
70.
56. Gorin NC, Labopin M, Czerw T, et al. Autologous stem cell transplantation for adult acute myelocytic leukemia in ﬁrst remission better outcomes after busulfan and melphalan compared with
busulfan and cyclophosphamide: a retrospective study from the
Acute Leukemia Working Party of the European Society for Blood and
Marrow Transplantation (EBMT). Cancer. 2017;123:824e831.
57. Lowenberg B. Sense and nonsense of high-dose cytarabine for acute
myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2013;121:26e28.
58. Cunningham I, Kohno B. 18FDG-PET/CT: 21st century approach to
leukemic tumors in 124 cases. Am J Hematol. 2016;91:379e384.
59. Bakst RL, Tallman MS, Douer D, Yahalom J. How I treat extramedullary
acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2011;118:3785e3793.
60. Duarte RF, Labopin M, Bader P, et al. Indications for haematopoietic
stem cell transplantation for haematological diseases, solid tumours
and immune disorders: current practice in Europe, 2019. Bone
Marrow Transplant. 2019;54(10):1525e1552.
61. Majhail NS, Farnia SH, Carpenter PA, et al. Indications for autologous
and allogeneic hematopoietic cell transplantation: guidelines from
the American Society for Blood and Marrow Transplantation. Biol
Blood Marrow Transplant. 2015;21:1863e1869.
62. Versluis J, Labopin M, Niederwieser D, et al. Prediction of non-relapse
mortality in recipients of reduced intensity conditioning allogeneic
stem cell transplantation with AML in ﬁrst complete remission. Leukemia. 2015;29:51e57.

Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

63. Robinson TM, O’Donnell PV, Fuchs EJ, Luznik L. Haploidentical bone
marrow and stem cell transplantation: experience with post-transplantation cyclophosphamide. Semin Hematol. 2016;53:90e97.
64. Ruggeri A, Labopin M, Sanz G, et al. Comparison of outcomes after
unrelated cord blood and unmanipulated haploidentical stem cell
transplantation in adults with acute leukemia. Leukemia. 2015;29:
1891e1900.
65. Ciurea SO, Zhang MJ, Bacigalupo AA, et al. Haploidentical transplant
with posttransplant cyclophosphamide vs matched unrelated donor
transplant for acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2015;126:1033e1040.
66. Milano F, Gooley T, Wood B, et al. Cord-blood transplantation in
patients with minimal residual disease. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:944e
953.
67. Canaani J, Savani BN, Labopin M, et al. Donor age determines
outcome in acute leukemia patients over 40 undergoing haploidentical hematopoietic cell transplantation. Am J Hematol.
2018;93:246e253.
68. Scott BL, Pasquini MC, Logan BR, et al. Myeloablative versus reducedintensity hematopoietic cell transplantation for acute myeloid leukemia and myelodysplastic syndromes. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:1154e
1161.
69. Rambaldi A, Grassi A, Masciulli A, et al. Busulfan plus cyclophosphamide versus busulfan plus ﬂudarabine as a preparative regimen
for allogeneic haemopoietic stem-cell transplantation in patients with
acute myeloid leukaemia: an open-label, multicentre, randomised,
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16:1525e1536.
70. Jethava YS, Sica S, Savani B, et al. Conditioning regimens for allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplants in acute myeloid leukemia.
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2017;52:1504e1511.
71. Craddock C. Conditioning intensity in HCT for AML: the jury is still out.
Lancet Haematol. 2018;5:e132ee133.
72. Ruutu T, Gratwohl A, de Witte T, et al. Prophylaxis and treatment of
GVHD: EBMT-ELN working group recommendations for a standardized
practice. Bone Marrow Transplant. 2014;49:168e173.
73. Larson RA, Mandrekar SJ, Sanford BL, et al. An analysis of maintenance therapy and post-midostaurin outcomes in the international
prospective randomized, placebo-controlled, double-blind trial
(CALGB 10603/RATIFY [Alliance]) for newly diagnosed acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) patients with FLT3 mutations. Blood. 2017;130:145.
74. Huls G, Chitu DA, Havelange V, et al. Azacitidine maintenance after
intensive chemotherapy improves DFS in older AML patients. Blood.
2019;133:1457e1464.
75. Wei AH. The QUAZAR AML-001 maintenance trial: results of a phase
III international, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled study
of CC-486 (oral formulation of azacitidine) in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) in ﬁrst remission. Blood. 2019;134(Suppl_2).
LBA-3.
76. Burchert A, Bug G, Finke J, et al. Sorafenib as maintenance therapy
post allogeneic stem cell transplantation for FLT3-ITD positive AML:
results from the randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled multicentre Sormain Trial. Blood. 2018;132:661.
77. Schlenk RF, Weber D, Fiedler W, et al. Midostaurin added to
chemotherapy and continued single-agent maintenance therapy in
acute myeloid leukemia with FLT3-ITD. Blood. 2019;133:840e851.
78. de Lima M, Oran B, Champlin RE, et al. CC-486 Maintenance after
stem cell transplantation in patients with acute myeloid leukemia or
myelodysplastic syndromes. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2018;24:
2017e2024.
79. Platzbecker U, Middeke JM, Sockel K, et al. Measurable residual
disease-guided treatment with azacitidine to prevent haematological
relapse in patients with myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid
leukaemia (RELAZA2): an open-label, multicentre, phase 2 trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2018;19:1668e1679.
80. Orti G, Barba P, Fox L, et al. Donor lymphocyte infusions in AML and
MDS: enhancing the graft-versus-leukemia effect. Exp Hematol.
2017;48:1e11.
81. Dombret H, Seymour JF, Butrym A, et al. International phase 3
study of azacitidine vs conventional care regimens in older patients

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

711

M. Heuser et al.

Annals of Oncology

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

712

with newly diagnosed AML with >30% blasts. Blood. 2015;126:291e
299.
Kantarjian HM, Thomas XG, Dmoszynska A, et al. Multicenter, randomized, open-label, phase III trial of decitabine versus patient
choice, with physician advice, of either supportive care or low-dose
cytarabine for the treatment of older patients with newly diagnosed
acute myeloid leukemia. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30:2670e2677.
DiNardo CD, Pratz K, Pullarkat V, et al. Venetoclax combined with
decitabine or azacitidine in treatment-naive, elderly patients with
acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2019;133:7e17.
Cortes JE, Heidel FH, Hellmann A, et al. Randomized comparison of
low dose cytarabine with or without glasdegib in patients with newly
diagnosed acute myeloid leukemia or high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome. Leukemia. 2019;33:379e389.
Short NJ, Kantarjian HM, Garcia-Manero G, et al. A randomized phase
II trial of 5-day versus 10-day schedules of decitabine for older patients with previously untreated acute myeloid leukemia. Blood.
2017;130:2577.
Burnett AK, Milligan D, Prentice AG, et al. A comparison of low-dose
cytarabine and hydroxyurea with or without all-trans retinoic acid for
acute myeloid leukemia and high-risk myelodysplastic syndrome in
patients not considered ﬁt for intensive treatment. Cancer. 2007;109:
1114e1124.
DiNardo CD, Rausch CR, Benton C, et al. Clinical experience with the
BCL2-inhibitor venetoclax in combination therapy for relapsed and
refractory acute myeloid leukemia and related myeloid malignancies.
Am J Hematol. 2018;93:401e407.
Ram R, Amit O, Zuckerman T, et al. Venetoclax in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia refractory to hypomethylating agents-a multicenter
historical prospective study. Ann Hematol. 2019;98:1927e1932.
Perl AE, Martinelli G, Cortes JE, et al. Gilteritinib or chemotherapy for
relapsed or refractory FLT3-mutated AML. N Engl J Med. 2019;381:
1728e1740.
Revesz D, Chelghoum Y, Le QH, et al. Salvage by timed sequential
chemotherapy in primary resistant acute myeloid leukemia: analysis
of prognostic factors. Ann Hematol. 2003;82:684e690.
Craddock C, Labopin M, Pillai S, et al. Factors predicting outcome
after unrelated donor stem cell transplantation in primary refractory
acute myeloid leukaemia. Leukemia. 2011;25:808e813.
Schmid C, Schleuning M, Schwerdtfeger R, et al. Long-term survival in
refractory acute myeloid leukemia after sequential treatment with
chemotherapy and reduced-intensity conditioning for allogeneic stem
cell transplantation. Blood. 2006;108:1092e1099.
Breems DA, Van Putten WL, Huijgens PC, et al. Prognostic index for
adult patients with acute myeloid leukemia in ﬁrst relapse. J Clin
Oncol. 2005;23:1969e1978.
Megias-Vericat JE, Martinez-Cuadron D, Sanz MA, Montesinos P.
Salvage regimens using conventional chemotherapy agents for
relapsed/refractory adult AML patients: a systematic literature review. Ann Hematol. 2018;97:1115e1153.
Burnett AK, Goldstone A, Hills RK, et al. Curability of patients with
acute myeloid leukemia who did not undergo transplantation in ﬁrst
remission. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:1293e1301.
Wattad M, Weber D, Döhner K, et al. Impact of salvage regimens on
response and overall survival in acute myeloid leukemia with induction failure. Leukemia. 2017;31:1306e1313.
Schmid C, Labopin M, Nagler A, et al. Donor lymphocyte infusion in the
treatment of ﬁrst hematological relapse after allogeneic stem-cell
transplantation in adults with acute myeloid leukemia: a retrospective
risk factors analysis and comparison with other strategies by the EBMT
Acute Leukemia Working Party. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25:4938e4945.
Schmid C, Labopin M, Nagler A, et al. Treatment, risk factors, and
outcome of adults with relapsed AML after reduced intensity

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.02.018

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

conditioning for allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Blood.
2012;119:1599e1606.
Craddock C, Labopin M, Robin M, et al. Clinical activity of azacitidine
in patients who relapse after allogeneic stem cell transplantation for
acute myeloid leukemia. Haematologica. 2016;101:879e883.
Cortes JE, Khaled S, Martinelli G, et al. Quizartinib versus salvage
chemotherapy in relapsed or refractory FLT3-ITD acute myeloid
leukaemia (QuANTUM-R): a multicentre, randomised, controlled,
open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20:984e997.
Stahl M, DeVeaux M, Montesinos P, et al. Hypomethylating agents in
relapsed and refractory AML: outcomes and their predictors in a large
international patient cohort. Blood Adv. 2018;2:923e932.
DiNardo CD, Stein EM, de Botton S, et al. Durable remissions with
ivosidenib in IDH1-mutated relapsed or refractory AML. N Engl J Med.
2018;378:2386e2398.
Stein EM, DiNardo CD, Pollyea DA, et al. Enasidenib in mutant IDH2
relapsed or refractory acute myeloid leukemia. Blood. 2017;130:722e
731.
Fathi AT, DiNardo CD, Kline I, et al. Differentiation syndrome associated with enasidenib, a selective inhibitor of mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase 2: analysis of a phase 1/2 study. JAMA Oncol. 2018;4(8):
1106e1110.
Whittle AM, Feyler S, Bowen DT. Durable second complete remissions
with oral melphalan in hypocellular acute myeloid leukemia and refractory anemia with excess blast with normal karyotype relapsing
after intensive chemotherapy. Leukemia Res Rep. 2013;2:9e11.
Sanz MA, Fenaux P, Tallman MS, et al. Management of acute promyelocytic leukemia: updated recommendations from an expert
panel of the European LeukemiaNet. Blood. 2019;133:1630e1643.
Lo-Coco F, Avvisati G, Vignetti M, et al. Retinoic acid and arsenic
trioxide for acute promyelocytic leukemia. N Engl J Med. 2013;369:
111e121.
Burnett AK, Russell NH, Hills RK, et al. Arsenic trioxide and all-trans
retinoic acid treatment for acute promyelocytic leukaemia in all risk
groups (AML17): results of a randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2015;16:1295e1305.
Lo-Coco F, Avvisati G, Vignetti M, et al. Front-line treatment of acute
promyelocytic leukemia with AIDA induction followed by riskadapted consolidation for adults younger than 61 years: results of
the AIDA-2000 trial of the GIMEMA group. Blood. 2010;116:3171e
3179.
Iland HJ, Collins M, Bradstock K, et al. Use of arsenic trioxide in
remission induction and consolidation therapy for acute promyelocytic leukaemia in the Australasian Leukaemia and Lymphoma Group
(ALLG) APML4 study: a non-randomised phase 2 trial. Lancet Haematol. 2015;2:e357ee366.
Lo-Coco F, Cimino G, Breccia M, et al. Gemtuzumab ozogamicin
(Mylotarg) as a single agent for molecularly relapsed acute promyelocytic leukemia. Blood. 2004;104:1995e1999.
Abaza Y, Kantarjian H, Garcia-Manero G, et al. Long-term outcome of
acute promyelocytic leukemia treated with all-trans-retinoic acid,
arsenic trioxide, and gemtuzumab. Blood. 2017;129:1275e1283.
Ganzel C, Mathews V, Alimoghaddam K, et al. Autologous transplant
remains the preferred therapy for relapsed APL in CR2. Bone Marrow
Transplant. 2016;51:1180e1183.
Au WY, Tam S, Fong BM, Kwong YL. Determinants of cerebrospinal ﬂuid
arsenic concentration in patients with acute promyelocytic leukemia on
oral arsenic trioxide therapy. Blood. 2008;112:3587e3590.
Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic
infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin
Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139e144 (Adapted from: Gross PA, Barrett TL,
Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18:421).

Volume 31

-

Issue 6

-

2020

