SPECIAL ARTICLE

Bladder cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment
and follow-up5
T. Powles1, J. Bellmunt2, E. Comperat3, M. De Santis4, R. Huddart5, Y. Loriot6, A. Necchi7, B. P. Valderrama8, A. Ravaud9,10,
S. F. Shariat11, B. Szabados1,12, M. S. van der Heijden13 & S. Gillessen14, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1

Barts Cancer Centre, Barts Health NHS Trust, Queen Mary University of London, London, UK; 2Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Centre-IMIM Lab, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, USA; 3L’Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France; 4Department of Urology, Charité Universitätsmedizin, Berlin, Germany;
5
Royal Marsden Hospital, Institute of Cancer Research, London, UK; 6Département de Médecine Oncologique, Université Paris-Saclay and Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
France; 7Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Department of Medical Oncology, IRCCS San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy; 8University Hospital Virgen del Rocio, Seville,
Spain; 9Hôpital Saint-André CHU, Bordeaux; 10Department of Medical Oncology, Bordeaux University Hospital, Bordeaux, France; 11Department of Urology, Medical
University of Vienna, Vienna General Hospital, Vienna, Austria; 12Department of Urology, University College London Hospital, London, UK; 13Department of Medical
Oncology, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; 14Oncology Institute of Southern Switzerland (IOSI), EOC, Lugano, Switzerland

Available online 30 November 2021

Key words: immune checkpoint inhibitors, ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor inhibitors, antibody drug conjugates,
bladder cancer, urothelial carcinoma, platinum-based chemotherapy

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Urothelial carcinoma (UC), also described as bladder cancer,
is the 10th most common cancer type worldwide, with an
estimated 549 000 new cases and 200 000 deaths in 2018.
The highest incidence rates in Europe are observed in
Southern Europe, e.g. Greece (5800 new cases and 1537
deaths in 2018), Spain and Italy, and Western Europe, e.g.
Belgium and the Netherlands.1 The most important risk
factor for developing bladder cancer is tobacco smoking,
which accounts for w50% of cases,2 followed by occupational exposure to aromatic amines and ionising radiation.3
DIAGNOSIS AND PATHOLOGY/MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Diagnosis
Painless haematuria is the most common presenting
symptom in bladder cancer and should be investigated in all
cases. Other common symptoms include dysuria, increased
frequency and/or urgency (Figure 1). Bladder ultrasonography or cross-sectional imaging can identify an
intraluminal mass in the bladder, but the ﬁnal diagnosis is
based on cystoscopic examination of the bladder and

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via
Ginevra 4, 6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5
Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: November 2021. This
publication supersedes the previously published versiondAnn Oncol. 2014;
25(suppl 3):iii40-iii48.
0923-7534/© 2021 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

244

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

histological evaluation of the tissue obtained either with
cold-cup biopsy or transurethral resection of the bladder
tumour (TURBT). Complete resection of all tumour tissue
should be achieved when possible. The presence of lamina
propria and detrusor muscle in the resected specimen is
essential for accurate staging in most cases. Concurrent
carcinoma in situ (CIS) is an adverse prognostic factor;4
hence, bladder biopsies from suspicious urothelium or
mapping biopsies from normal-looking mucosa in patients
with positive urine cytology, or a history of high-grade (HG)
non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) should be
taken.5 In patients with high-risk NMIBC (described in
Table 1), and in particular those with CIS, upper tract
imaging should be carried out to screen for synchronous
upper urinary tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC). Computed
tomography (CT) urography or magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) urography is used to detect papillary tumours in the
urinary tract.6 The management of bladder cancer is based
on the pathological ﬁndings of the biopsy, with attention to
histology, grade and depth of invasion (Table 1).
Muscle-invasive bladder cancer (MIBC) should be staged
according to the Union for International Cancer Control
(UICC) TNM (tumourenodeemetastasis) eighth edition and
the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) TNM
staging systems and should be grouped into categories
(Supplementary Tables S1 and S2, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012).
Pathology/molecular biology
Pathological diagnosis should be made according to the
World Health Organization (WHO) 2016 classiﬁcation
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

Presentation
1. Painless haematuria (80% of patients)
2. Irritative symptoms [e.g. dysuria, frequency, urgency (invasive or high-grade tumours)]
3. Bone pain (suspected bone metastatis) or flank pain (from retroperitoneal metastases or
ureteral obstruction)

Work-up
History and physical examination
Cystoscopic evaluation including biopsy or TURBT with bimanual examination
Urine cytology
Blood work (haematology and biochemistry)
Upper urinary tract imaging, mainly CT urogram, alternatively intravenous or
retrograde pyelogram (to exclude 2.5% of patients who have synchronous
upper tract urothelial cancer)
6. Metastatic work-up in patients with high risk of metastases (CT chest, abdomen
and pelvis, liver function tests)
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Staging and gradinga

Management of organ-confined disease

Management of metastatic disease

Figure 1. Diagnostic work-up of patient with suspected bladder cancer.
CT, computed tomography; TURBT, transurethral resection of the bladder tumour.
a
See Supplementary Tables S1 and S2, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012.

(Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012).7
Approximately 75% of patients with bladder cancer
present with NMIBC pTa-pT1, pTis).3 The majority of
patients with MIBC (pT2a-pT4b) are diagnosed with primary
invasive bladder cancer and up to 15% of patients have a
previous history of NMIBC, almost exclusively high-risk
NMIBC.3 All MIBCs are considered as HG.
TURBT or bladder biopsy only allow for staging up to T2.
Clinical T3 or T4 disease is identiﬁed by bimanual exam
under anaesthesia and/or cross-sectional imaging. NMIBC is
graded as low grade (LG) or HG according to the latest WHO
2016 criteria.
Ninety percent of carcinomas of the upper and lower
urothelial tract are UCs, with or without other variants
(Supplementary Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012). The percentage of the variant
morphology should be given in the pathological report. If the
squamous or adenocarcinoma part is >95%, the UC should be
considered as a pure squamous/adenocarcinoma. The
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

variant histology group comprises nested carcinoma, large
nested, microcystic, micropapillary, lymphoepithelioma-like,
plasmacytoid/signet ring cell/diffuse, sarcomatoid, giant
cell, poorly differentiated, lipid rich and clear-cell UC, all of
which are of urothelial origin.7 Small-cell/neuroendocrine
subtypes should be speciﬁed when they are present and
the percentage should be noted.
Urine cytology can facilitate the diagnosis of HG UC but
should not be used as the primary method of histological
diagnosis. It has a high sensitivity in HG tumours including
CIS (84%), but low sensitivity in G1/LG tumours (16%).8
Further molecular diagnosis is being investigated in the
advanced disease setting, but its role has yet to be clearly
deﬁned. Oncogenic alterations [e.g. ﬁbroblast growth factor
receptor (FGFR) DNA alterations] and other forms of
immuno-oncology therapy biomarker testing, such as
programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) expression, are being
used for patient selection. Multiple methodologies exist for
biomarker measurement and clinicians should follow
European Medicines Agency (EMA) guidance for PD-L1,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

245

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology
Table 1. Risk group stratiﬁcation of patients with NMIBC and treatment recommendations
Risk group
stratiﬁcation

Characteristics

Treatment recommendations

Low-risk tumours

Primary, solitary, Ta G1 (PUNLMP, LG), <3 cm, no CIS

Intermediate-risk
tumours

All tumours not deﬁned in the two adjacent
categories (between the category of low and
high risk)

High-risk tumours

Any of the following:
 T1 tumour
 G3, HG tumour
 CIS
 Multiple, recurrent and large (>3 cm)
Ta G1-G2/LG tumours (all features must be present)
 T1 G3/HG associated with concurrent bladder CIS
 Multiple and/or large T1 G3/HG and/or recurrent
T1 G3/HG, T1 G3/HG with CIS in the prostatic urethra
 Some forms of variant histology of urothelial
carcinoma, lymphovascular invasion

One immediate instillation of intravesical ChT after TURBT [I, A]
followed by cystoscopic surveillance
In patients with previous low recurrence rate (less than or
equal to one recurrence per year) and expected EORTC
recurrence score <5, one immediate instillation of intravesical
ChT after TURBT [IV, C]
In all patients, either:
 instillations of ChT for a maximum of 1 year [I, A]
Or
 one-year full-dose BCG treatment (induction plus 3-weekly
instillations at 3, 6 and 12 months) [I, A]
Full-dose BCG instillations for 1-3 years or radical cystectomy
[I, A]

Subgroup of
highest-risk tumours

Radical cystectomy or BCG induction and 3 years of
maintenance if achievable [I, A]

BCG, bacillus Calmette-Guerin; ChT, chemotherapy; CIS, carcinoma in situ; EORTC, European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer; G, grade; HG, high grade; LG, low
grade; NMIBC, non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer; PUNLMP, papillary urothelial neoplasm of low malignant potential; TURBT, transurethral resection of the bladder tumour.

linking speciﬁc biomarkers methods with speciﬁc agents.
Molecular diagnostics such as molecular subtype
classiﬁcation, FGFR and PD-L1 status are not routinely
required [IV, C]. Molecular subtype analysis does not
currently have a role in treatment selection. Genomic
testing (PCR- or next-generation sequencing-based)
should be used for detection of FGFR2/3 mutations and
fusions.9,10 A personalised medicine synopsis is shown in
Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012.
Recommendations
 Painless haematuria is the most common presenting
symptom in bladder cancer and should in all cases be
investigated [IV, A].
 The diagnosis of bladder cancer is based on cystoscopic
examination of the bladder and histological evaluation
of tissue obtained either with cold-cup biopsy or
TURBT. Complete resection of all tumour tissue should
be achieved when possible. Muscle tissue should be
included in the biopsies, except when a Ta/LG is expected
[IV, A].
 Cross-sectional upper tract imaging (CT/MRI urography)
is recommended to screen for synchronous UTUC, in
cases of HG bladder cancer [IV, B].
 Pathological diagnosis should be made according to
latest WHO classiﬁcation [IV, A].
 In addition to stage and grade, presence and
percentage of variant histology, lymphovascular invasion
and presence of detrusor muscle should be reported
[IV, A].
 Urine cytology can facilitate the diagnosis of HG UC but
cannot be used as the primary method of histological diagnosis [IV, B]. The Paris system should be used for reporting.
246

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

 Molecular diagnostics such as The Cancer Genome Atlas
(TCGA) classiﬁcation and PD-L1 status are not required
for all tumours [IV, C].
STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Staging of NMIBC
A scoring system and risk assessment table has been
developed to predict 1- and 5-year disease recurrence and
progression in patients with Ta-T1 disease, using the WHO
1973 grading system.11 An updated model has been
developed for patients with Ta-T1 bladder cancer, treated
with 1-3 years of bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG)
maintenance. Patients with CIS alone were not included.
The scoring system takes into account the number and size
of tumours resected, depth of invasion, prior recurrences,
presence of CIS and grade of the tumours after TURBT.
Based on the above, the European Association of Urology
classiﬁed the patients into four risk categories: low-risk,
intermediate-risk, high-risk and very-high-risk tumours
(Table 1), which constitutes the basis for treatment and
follow-up recommendations in NMIBC [IV, B]. Patients with
NMIBC have a heterogeneous prognosis. While patients
with high-risk NMIBC suffer from a high recurrence rate (up
to 50% at 5 years), they also have a low progression rate
(<5% at 5 years). Those with T1/HG (grade 3) do poorly,
with 1- and 5-year disease progression rates with 11% and
20%, respectively. Cancer-speciﬁc 5-year survival for these
patients is >90%.12,13
Regional and distant staging of invasive bladder cancer
If muscle invasion has been conﬁrmed, regional and
distant staging should be carried out with further imaging
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

studies such as contrast-enhanced CT of the chest,
abdomen and pelvis or MRI of the abdomen and pelvis
(with CT of the chest). The risk of lymph node (LN)
metastasis increases proportionally with advancing local
tumour stage.14,15 Both tests can be used to assess
extravesical invasion but are often unable to reliably
differentiate between T stages. Imaging is recommended
before TURBT. Both tests are useful to detect enlarged LNs,
but have low sensitivity (48%-87%) and speciﬁcity for the
detection of LN metastasis.16,17 Overall, pelvic nodes >8
mm and abdominal nodes >10 mm in maximum short-axis
diameter, detected by CT or MRI, should be considered as
suspicious for LN metastasis.18,19 MRI generally is more
accurate for determining depth of invasion and is
recommended when imaging deﬁnition of stage of
invasion is important. A scoring system for deﬁning muscle
invasion has been proposed (VI-Rads) with some accuracy,
with a sensitivity and speciﬁcity of 0.83 [95% conﬁdence
interval (CI) 0.70-0.90] and 0.90 (95% CI 0.83-0.95),
respectively.20,21 A chest-abdomen-pelvis CT should also be
carried out for staging of potential distant metastatic
disease [III, A]. The authors did not reach a consensus on
the role of [18F]2-ﬂuoro-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission
tomography (FDG-PET)-CT in MIBC. Despite inconsistencies
in sensitivity (23%-89%), FDG-PET-CT seems to have a high
speciﬁcity (81%-100%) for LN staging.22
Recommendations
 Patients with NMIBC are classiﬁed into four risk
categories based on tumour characteristics (low risk,
intermediate risk, high risk and very-high-risk; Table 1),
which constitutes the basis for treatment and follow-up
recommendations [IV, B].
 In patients with invasive disease (T1), regional and distant
staging should be carried out with further imaging studies
such as contrast-enhanced CT of chest-abdomen-pelvis or
MRI of abdomen/pelvis combined with chest CT [IV, B].
FDG-PET-CT may aid in the detection of LN and distant
metastases [IV, C], but no clear consensus was reached.
MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL/LOCOREGIONAL DISEASE

signiﬁcantly reduces the 5-year recurrence rate compared
with TURBT alone (59% versus 45%).23 The rate of
progression is negligible (<2% at 5 years).13
In patients with intermediate-risk NMIBC, additional
courses of intravesical therapy are recommended to reduce
risk of recurrence [I, A]. This can consist of either:
1. Instillations of ChT for a maximum of 1 year.
Or
2. 12 months of BCG instillation therapy (induction therapy
with six BCG instillations at weekly intervals, followed by
maintenance therapy with three BCG instillations each
at 3, 6 and 12 months after the start of the induction
cycle) is recommended [I, A]. In trials with BCG
therapy (induction and maintenance therapy) in
intermediate- and high-risk NMIBC, there was a 32%
reduction in the risk of recurrence (P < 0.0001) for
BCG compared with MMC. However, no statistically
signiﬁcant difference was observed in progression rate
between the two groups.24
In patients with high-risk NMIBC, full-dose intravesical BCG
for 1-3 years (at least 1 year) is recommended [I, A].
Three-year maintenance is more effective than 1 year to
prevent recurrences.25 Induction consists of weekly instillations for 6 weeks while maintenance consists of weekly
instillations for 3 weeks. Instillations at 3, 6, 12, 18, 24, 30 and
36 months are recommended [I, A]. The 3-year maintenance
BCG schedule signiﬁcantly reduces the risk or recurrence
compared with 1-year maintenance [hazard ratio (HR) for 1
versus 3 years: 1.61, 95% CI 1.13-2.30, P ¼ 0.01] in patients
with high-risk tumours. This beneﬁt of 3-year therapy does
not occur for patients with intermediate-risk tumours.25
In patients with high-risk NMIBC, there is a signiﬁcant risk
of residual disease after initial TURBT.26 Therefore, a second
resection should be carried out 4-6 weeks after the ﬁrst
resection when:
 The initial TURBT was incomplete.
 If there is no detrusor muscle in the specimen on the
initial resection, except for Ta LG and CIS.
 In all pT1 tumours and all HG tumours, except for
patients with primary CIS [I, A].

Treatment of NMIBC

The second TURBT should include a resection of the
previous tumour site.

Optimal treatment of NMIBC is the complete removal of all
visible lesions in the bladder, followed by intravesical
instillations or early radical cystectomy (RC), according to risk
stratiﬁcation described in the preceding text [I, A] (Figure 2,
Table 1, Supplementary Table S5, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012). If available, improved
tumour visualisation techniques (ﬂuorescence cystoscopy,
narrow-band imaging) during TURBT are recommended.
In patients with low-risk NMIBC and those with small
papillary recurrences, detected >1 year after the previous
tumour, single, immediate, intravesical chemotherapy (ChT)
instillation, such as mitomycin C (MMC), is recommended
[I, A], in combination with continued cystoscopic
surveillance. Immediate, intravesical ChT instillation

Treatment after failure of BCG therapy. The deﬁnition of
failure after BCG therapy is important to identify
patients who are unlikely to respond to further BCG
therapy. In patients with very-high-risk NMIBC, these
recommendations apply, except in those in whom early RC
is planned. Early RC should be considered and discussed
with all very-high-risk NMIBC cases. The ﬁnal choice is made
based on a shared decision-making process between
patient and physician.
BCG failure is divided into the following four types:27
1. BCG-refractory:
 persistent HG disease at 6 months despite adequate
BCG treatment; OR

Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

247

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

Non-muscle-invasive disease

Muscle-invasive disease

If suspected low-risk tumour:
one immediate instillation of
intravesical ChT after TURBT [I, A]

Unfit for
cisplatin-based ChT

Low risk

Intermediate risk

High risk

Very high risk or
BCG unresponsive

Cystoscopic
surveillance

Cystoscopic surveillance
+ intravesical instillations
(e.g. 12 months BCG)
[I, A]

Cystoscopic surveillance
+ intravesical instillations
(e.g. 36 months BCG)
[I, A]

Offer radical cystectomy
[III, B]

Fit for
cisplatin-based ChT

3-4 cycles cisplatinbased ChT [I, A]

Radical cystectomy with pelvic lymphadenectomy [I, A]
Multimodality bladder-sparing treatments [II, B]

Risk- and treatment-adapted follow-up

Figure 2. Management of patients with histopathologically conﬁrmed bladder cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; turquoise: combination of treatments or other systemic treatments;
white: other aspects of management.
BCG, bacillus Calmette-Guerin; ChT, chemotherapy; TURBT, transurethral resection of the bladder tumour.

 stage progression at 3 months after adequate BCG induction (i.e. HG T1 at 3 months after initial CIS or HG Ta).
2. BCG-relapsing: recurrence of HG disease after achieving
a disease-free state at 6 months after adequate BCG.
3. BCG-intolerant: disease persistence as a result of
inability to receive adequate BCG because of toxicity.
4. BCG-unresponsive: combination of BCG-refractory and
BCG-relapsing within 6 months of last BCG.
RC should be carried out in HG tumours (T1/HG, Ta/HG,
CIS) that are unresponsive to BCG due to the high risk of
progression [III, B]. Thermo-ChT can be offered as an
alternative, only in patients unwilling or unable to have RC
and can obtain 2-year disease-free survival (DFS) in 47% of
patients.28 BCG re-induction achieved similar disease
control to thermo-ChT in a randomised trial [II, B]29 and can
be considered as an alternative.
The immune checkpoint inhibitor (ICI) pembrolizumab
given intravenously was evaluated in a single-arm phase II
trial (KEYNOTE-057), in patients with BCG-unresponsive
NMIBC with CIS who were ineligible for or elected not to
undergo RC (n ¼ 102).30 At 3 months, the study showed a
complete response (CR) rate of 41% (95% CI 31%-51%) in 96
patients with high-risk NMIBC with CIS with or without
papillary tumours, and a median duration of response of 16.2
months (range: 0.0-30.4). Intravenous pembrolizumab can be
considered in patients with BCG-unresponsive disease who
are not ﬁt for or refuse RC [III, C]. More robust data are
required before stronger recommendations can be made.
Intravesical nadofaragene ﬁradenovec therapy [not Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) or EMA approved as of
November 2021] has also been studied in BCG-refractory
NMIBC with CIS (n ¼ 103; 53% CR at 3 months; 24% CR
at 12 months) [III, C].31 These data have the same
recommendations as pembrolizumab in this population.
248

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

Treatment of MIBC
Multidisciplinary care via tumour board discussions and/or
directed consultations with a medical oncologist, radiation
oncologist and urologist is recommended for the optimal
management of bladder cancer [IV, B].
Radical cystectomy. RC with pelvic lymph node dissection
(PLND) is the standard treatment of MIBC cT2-T4a, N0 M0 [I,
A].32 RC with PLND is strongly recommended in very-highrisk and BCG-unresponsive NMIBC (Figure 2). A continent
orthotopic (neobladder), continent cutaneous (catheterisable pouch) or incontinent cutaneous (conduit) reconstructions are chosen based on patient’s general health
and wishes.33 A neobladder can be offered to patients
lacking any contraindications and who have no tumour in
the urethra or at the level of urethral dissection [IV, C].
Standard PLND is deﬁned as the removal of all lymphatic
tissues around the common iliac, external iliac, internal iliac
and obturator regions up to the crossing of the ureters over
the common iliac vessels at a minimum.34,35 Extended
lymphadenectomy includes lymphatic tissues in the region
of the aortic bifurcation and presacral and common iliac
vessels above the crossing ureters, in addition to the standard PLND region. The optimal extent of PLND is not
established to date. In a recent prospective phase III,
randomised trial, extended PLND failed to show a
signiﬁcant advantage in absolute improvement of 5-year
recurrence-free survival compared with standard PLND,
though the study suffered from many limitations.36
Patients with radiological suspicious node-positive
disease (cN1) can be considered for surgery37 (with or
without neoadjuvant ChT) [IV, B]. Patients with clinical node
positivity beneﬁt from preoperative platinum-based ChT
followed by RC plus PLND.38-40 Overall, the number of
positive LNs is signiﬁcantly associated with increased risk of
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

cancer-speciﬁc death (HR 1.9, 95% CI 1.04-3.46 for N1
disease; HR 4.3, 95% CI 2.25-8.34 for 2 LNs).41
Organ-preservation therapy. Organ-preservation therapy
for MIBC is a reasonable option for patients seeking an
alternative to RC and for those who are medically unﬁt for
surgery (Figure 2) [II, B]. Contemporary protocols utilise
aggressive TURBT alone, TURBT plus radiotherapy (RT),
TURBT plus ChT or a tri-modality combination of TURBT plus
RT and ChT, the latter being preferred [II, B]. There
are multiple patient- and tumour-related factors which
contribute to the selection of trimodal therapy versus RC.
The ideal patient for trimodal therapy has a tumour that
can undergo a visible complete resection, has no associated
hydronephrosis, does not invade the prostatic urethra and
is not associated with diffuse CIS throughout the bladder.
Select patients who do not meet all these criteria can still
be successfully treated with this approach. The initial
prospective, randomised comparison of RT alone versus
concomitant chemoradiotherapy (CRT) demonstrated
improved local control rate when cisplatin was given with
RT (HR 0.50, 90% CI 0.29-0.86) [II, B].42 A second trial
showed that hypoxic sensitisation with carbogen and
nicotinamide (bladder carbogen nicotinamide) reduced the
risk of relapse (54% versus 43% with RT alone) and death
[II, B].43 A third randomised trial (BC2001) demonstrated
improved results for CRT using the combination of
5-ﬂuorouracil and MMC in terms of locoregional survival
(67%) and DFS (54%) [I, A].44 A multidisciplinary approach
including urologists, medical oncologists and radiation
oncologists is necessary. A cystoscopy with bladder biopsy is
mandatory for response evaluation either midway through
treatment or 2-3 months thereafter. If persistent or recurrent muscle-invasive disease is observed at response evaluation or during follow-up (cystoscopy and urinary cytology
every 3 months during the ﬁrst 2 years, and every 6 months
thereafter), prompt RC is recommended when possible [II,
A]. NMIBC recurrences can occur in up to one-fourth of
patients after completion of trimodal therapy, with many
being treated by routine and standard therapy for NMIBC.
In this population after trimodal therapy, however, early
salvage RC should be considered in those with adverse
features, including T1 disease, tumour >3 cm, CIS or
lymphovascular invasion. The 5-year cancer-speciﬁc survival
and overall survival (OS) rates range from 50% to 82% and
from 36% to 74%, respectively, with salvage RC rates of
w20% for studies with a follow-up >5 years.45,46 The
pooled rate of non-response to trimodal therapy and local
recurrence after trimodal therapy, the two primary reasons
for salvage RC, is approximately 16% and 29%, respectively.46 Salvage RC can be carried out for local recurrences
with acceptable oncological control and no clear evidence
of any greater risk of early complications; however, there
may be a slightly increased risk for late complications,
namely small bowel obstruction, ureteral stricture and
parastomal hernia. The pooled rates of 5- and 10-year DFS
after salvage RC have been estimated at 54% and 46%,
respectively.46,47 Trimodal therapy with other sensitising
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

agents has been investigated in series from single-centre
cooperative groups and meta-analysis [III, B]. There are
clinical activity and acceptable outcome data. Patient
selection may play a role in these outcomes. Cross-trial
comparisons with RC should be avoided due to biases
arising from patient selection and follow-up.45,48-51
Neoadjuvant and adjuvant therapy. The use of cisplatinbased neoadjuvant ChT for bladder cancer is supported by
a meta-analysis of 11 randomised trials of 3005 patients
[I, A] (HR 0.86, 95% CI 0.77-0.95), which translated to a 5%
absolute increase in 5-year OS and a 9% absolute increase in
5-year DFS compared with cystectomy alone.52 There is a
lack of clarity about the optimal regimen.
Cisplatinegemcitabine or accelerated methotrexate,
vinblastine, adriamycin and cisplatin (MVAC) are the most
widely given neoadjuvant ChT regimens and can be
recommended [III, B].53-55 There is also a lack of clarity on
the number of cycles to be given. Three cycles were given in
the original positive randomised phase III study, although
most regimens/physicians currently administer four cycles.56
Pure squamous cell or adenocarcinoma MIBC should be
treated with primary RC [IV, B].57 MIBC with small-cell
neuroendocrine variant should be treated with neoadjuvant ChT followed by consolidating local therapy [IV,
B].57 A recent consensus meeting recommended cystectomy
without neoadjuvant ChT for micropapillary disease, while
data show no difference in response rates (RRs) compared
with pure UC [IV, B].57,58 Phase II data exist for neoadjuvant
ICI therapy and they are not currently recommended in
cisplatin-eligible or -ineligible patients [III, B].59,60 There is no
role for adjuvant treatment (ChT or RT) for those who have
received neoadjuvant ChT. These patients have been
included in the adjuvant immunotherapy trials.
Adjuvant cisplatin-based ChT in patients who did not
receive neoadjuvant therapy remains an area of debate.
There are no published positive randomised, phase III
studies for survival. An updated meta-analysis of nine
randomised trials including 945 patients found an OS
beneﬁt (HR 0.77, 95% CI 0.59-0.99) and DFS beneﬁt
(HR 0.66, 95% CI 0.45-0.91) among those who received
cisplatin-based adjuvant ChT versus observation [II, B].61
Subsequently, a randomised trial [European Organisation
for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) 30994]
reported a signiﬁcant beneﬁt of cisplatin-based ChT for DFS
(HR 0.54, 95% CI 0.4-0.73) compared with observation.62 A
statistically signiﬁcant OS beneﬁt was not shown (adjusted
HR 0.78, 95% CI 0.56-1.08) possibly due to insufﬁcient
recruitment. Adjuvant ChT in cisplatin-unﬁt patients is not
recommended [I, D].
Adjuvant atezolizumab for 1 year versus observation did
not improve DFS or OS in a large (n ¼ 809) randomised
study for high-risk UC [HR for DFS 0.89 (95% CI 0.74-1.08)63
and HR for OS 0.85 (95% CI 0.66-1.09)]. There was no
enrichment for outcome with the PD-L1 biomarker.
Adjuvant atezolizumab is not recommended.
Adjuvant nivolumab for 1 year versus placebo showed
improved DFS of 0.70 (95% CI 0.54-0.89; median follow-up
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

249

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology
of 20.9 months). There were also positive results in the 26%
of patients who were PD-L1-positive [DFS 0.53 (95% CI
0.34-0.84)]. OS (a secondary endpoint) has not yet been
presented.64 17.9% grade 3 or more treatment-related
adverse events occurred in the nivolumab arm. These
results are promising, especially in the biomarker-positive
population. Due to the inconsistency across trials and
uncertainty of the relationship between DFS and OS with
immunotherapy, OS results are awaited before this
treatment can be recommended [I, D].
Recommendations
Treatment of NMIBC
 Treatment of NMIBC should follow a risk-stratiﬁed
approach with TURBT and intravesical ChT or BCG in
intermediate- and high-risk patients [I, A].
 Subsets of patients with very-high-risk disease should be
offered RC. RC should be carried out in CIS or HG T1 that
are unresponsive to BCG due to the high risk of
progression [III, B].
 In patients who are BCG-unresponsive and -ineligible
for or refuse cystectomy, pembrolizumab or nadofaragene ﬁradenovec can be considered; however, more
robust data are required before stronger recommendations can be made for these and other bladder-sparing
approaches in BCG-unresponsive disease [III, C]. A
multidisciplinary approach is required for these patients
[IV, C].
Treatment of MIBC
 Multidisciplinary care via tumour board discussions
and/or directed consultations with a medical oncologist,
radiation oncologist and urologist is recommended for
the optimal management of bladder cancer [IV, B].
 RC with standard PLND is the standard treatment of
MIBC T2-T4a, N0 M0 [I, A].
 Patients with radiological suspicious node-positive disease (cN1) can be considered for surgery but should be
considered for preoperative platinum-based ChT [IV, B].
 Organ-preservation therapy with RT, as part of
multimodal schema for MIBC, is a reasonable option
for patients seeking an alternative to RC and an option
for those who are medically unﬁt for surgery [II, B].
 Contemporary organ-preservation protocols should utilise
tri-modality combination of TURBT, RT and ChT [II, B].
 Palliative RT can be offered for palliation (bleeding, pain)
[III, C].
 Adjuvant RT (with or without radiosensitising ChT) is not
standard treatment of patients with MIBC [III, C].
 Three to four cycles of cisplatin-based neoadjuvant ChT
should be given for MIBC [I, A]. Cross-sectional imaging
should occur after ChT before RC [IV, B].
 There is weak evidence to support the use of adjuvant
cisplatin-based ChT in patients who did not receive neoadjuvant therapy [II, B]. Neoadjuvant ChT is preferred.
 Inconsistent results exist for adjuvant ICIs in UC [I, A]. An
OS advantage is needed before it can be recommended
as standard therapy [I, D].
250

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED/METASTATIC DISEASE
Advanced or metastatic UC in patients ﬁt enough to
tolerate cisplatin-based combination ChT
Cisplatin-containing combination ChT is standard in
advanced or metastatic patients ﬁt enough to tolerate
cisplatin (Figure 3). A number of cisplatin-containing ChT
regimens are acceptable although gemcitabineecisplatin
[I, A] is the most widely used.65 Dose-dense MVAC [I, B],
MVAC with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor [I, B] and
gemcitabine, cisplatin and paclitaxel [I, C] have been tested
against gemcitabine and cisplatin.66-68 Although these
alternative regimens may lack proven advantages over
gemcitabine and cisplatin, similar results are reported and
either can be considered as an option in selected patients.
New treatments which build on the gemcitabineeplatinum
backbone will require clinically meaningful progression-free
survival (PFS) advantages, signiﬁcant OS or non-inferiority
with better tolerability to be recommended. For these
reasons, gemcitabine, cisplatin and bevacizumab regimen is
not recommended.69,70 The combination of platinum-based
ChT with ICIs has not resulted in positive signiﬁcant survival
advantages and is not currently recommended.71 Potential
beneﬁts in other endpoints such as PFS are modest. Final
results for atezolizumab with ChT are awaited.72 There is
currently no role for ICI therapy alone in this population.73
Advanced or metastatic UC in patients not eligible for
cisplatin-based combination ChT
Carboplatin-based ChT is recommended in patients unﬁt for
cisplatin [I, A]. Criteria for these have been deﬁned.74
Carboplatin with gemcitabine is the preferred regimen
[II, B].75 Gemcitabine and cisplatin can be considered for
patients otherwise ﬁt without comorbidities, a good
performance status (0-1) and a creatine clearance between
50 and 60 ml/min [III, B].76,77 This alternative has been
established over time as a standard treatment and can,
therefore, be supported despite a lack of robust data. A
recent randomised trial evaluated the safety of split-dose
cisplatin due to renal toxicity;78 the authors did not reach
consensus on its role. Six cycles of ChT are considered the
standard of care, although fewer cycles are acceptable, with
cumulative toxicity.79
Pembrolizumab or atezolizumab are alternative choices
for patients who are PD-L1-positive and not eligible for
cisplatin-based ChT, although randomised trials, which have
reported, failed to show signiﬁcant superiority compared
with ChT [III, B] (ﬁnal results are awaited for atezolizumab)
(Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012).73,80 In exploratory analyses,
the OS HR for pembrolizumab and atezolizumab versus
gemcitabine and carboplatin in this subset of biomarker
positives was 0.82 (95% CI 0.57-1.17) and 0.53 (95% CI
0.30-0.94), respectively. Final OS results for the
atezolizumab study are awaited. Biomarkers (SP142 for
atezolizumab; 22C3 for pembrolizumab) should be used to
match the drug, as recommended by the EMA.72,81
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

Treatment-naive advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer (stage IV)

Cisplatin-eligible

Cisplatin-ineligible and PD-L1unknown or -negativea

Cisplatin-ineligible and
PD-L1-positivea

Cisplatin-based ChT [I, A]b

Gemcitabine–carboplatin [II, B]b

Atezolizumab or
pembrolizumab [III, B]

Disease progressionc

No disease progressiond

Maintenance avelumab in those
tumours not progressing on
ChT [I, A; MCBS 4]e

Pembrolizumab [I, A; MCBS 4]e
Other ICI e.g. atezolizumab
[II, B–III, C]
Erdafitinib [III, B]f,g
ChT [II, C]h,i,j

Disease
progression

Disease progression

Disease progression

Enfortumab–vedotin
[I, A; MCBS 4]e,f
Erdafitinib [III, B]f,g
ChT [IV, C]h,i,j

Enfortumab–vedotin
[III, B; MCBS 4]e,f
Platinum-based ChT [IV, B]

Figure 3. Management of patients with metastatic bladder cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other aspects of management.
ChT, chemotherapy; EMA, European Medicines Agency; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FGFR, ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor; ICI, immune checkpoint inhibitor;
PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale.
a
Creatinine clearance <60 ml/min or World Health Organization (WHO) performance status 2 or comorbidity [neuropathy/hearing loss >grade 2 and New York Heart
Association (NYHA) class III heart failure].
b
Re-challenge with platinum-based ChT may be considered if progression occurred 12 months after the end of previous platinum-based ChT or 12 months after the
end of previous platinum-based ChT and maintenance avelumab.
c
For progressive disease on ChT or after the completion of ChT where maintenance avelumab was not given.
d
This should be assessed within 10 weeks of completion of ChT.
e
ESMO-MCBS v1.1120 was used to calculate scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA or the FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS
Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/scale-evaluation-forms-v1.0-v1.1/scale-evaluationforms-v1.1).
f
FDA approved; not currently EMA approved.
g
With selected FGFR DNA fusions and mutations.
h
Platinum doublets should be recommended if the treatment-free interval from the last platinum ChT is >1 year.
i
To be considered when other therapies are not available.
j
Paclitaxel, docetaxel or vinﬂunine should be used.

Well-tolerated durable responses were observed with both
immunotherapy drugs; however, in randomised trials, ChT
had higher RRs and longer PFS while immunotherapy had
longer duration of response.82,83 Median OS (mOS) was not
better with the use of ICIs. The PD-L1 biomarker for pembrolizumab (22C3) was not associated with improved outcomes compared with the biomarker negatives; the authors
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

question this approach. Final data from randomised trials
with durvalumab are similar with no OS beneﬁt.73
Treatment should continue for 2 years for pembrolizumab
and until progression for atezolizumab. Treatment postprogression is not recommended.
Platinum-based ChT followed by maintenance avelumab
is preferential compared with upfront ICIs in PD-L1
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

251

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology
biomarker-positive patients. No consensus could be reached
for ICIs in PD-L1 biomarker-negative patients not eligible for
any ChT.
Data for enfortumabevedotin (EV) with pembrolizumab
in ﬁrst-line cisplatin-ineligible population are encouraging
but no recommendations can be proposed due to the small
size of the study (n ¼ 43).84
Maintenance avelumab, started within 10 weeks of
completion of ﬁrst-line platinum-based ChT, is associated
with an OS advantage compared with best supportive care
in patients who did not have disease progression after four
to six cycles of gemcitabine plus cisplatin or carboplatin, and
is recommended (HR 0.69, 95% CI 0.56-0.86) [I, A;
ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale (ESMO-MCBS)
v1.1 score: 4] (Figure 3).85,86 An increase in mOS from 14 to
21 months was observed with avelumab. Treatment was
given until progression.
Treatment of relapsed advanced/metastatic UC
Pembrolizumab has a signiﬁcant survival advantage
compared with ChT in patients with tumours which have
relapsed after platinum-based therapy and did not
receive previous immunotherapy [mOS: 10.3 for pembrolizumab and 7.4 months for ChT (HR 0.73, 95% CI
0.59-0.91)] [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4] (Figure 3).
Responses were more frequent and durable for pembrolizumab compared with ChT (21% versus 11%,
respectively).87 An update with a minimum follow-up of 5
years showed 3-year response duration of 44% for pembrolizumab compared with 28.3% for ChT [I, A].87,88 The
IMVigor211 trial explored atezolizumab in PD-L1
biomarker-positive tumours in this population and failed
to show a signiﬁcant OS advantage. Results in the
intention-to-treat population favoured atezolizumab, but
statistical signiﬁcance could not be drawn due to the
study design (HR 0.85, 95% CI 0.73-0.99). The drug was
associated with an RR of 13%.89 In a recent updated
analysis, atezolizumab showed a 30-month OS of 18%
compared with 10% for ChT.90 Phase I-IV trials for atezolizumab exist in this population and the results are
consistent.91-93 For these reasons, the authors support
the use of atezolizumab in this setting [II, B] with a
weaker recommendation than for pembrolizumab.
Three other drugs (nivolumab [III, B], durvalumab [III, C]
and avelumab [III, C]) have data from single-arm trials.94-96
Durable responses occurred in w15%-20% of patients. It is
premature to assume that all these drugs have the same
activity in this setting.
Treatment with further ChT for platinum-refractory disease
is an alternative for patients in whom anti-programmed cell
death protein 1/PD-L1 therapy is not possible. This approach
is, however, not clearly associated with a survival beneﬁt.
Vinﬂunine [II, C], docetaxel [III, C] and paclitaxel [III, C] can be
considered,97,98 although vinﬂunine is the only EMA-approved
agent. Combinations with taxanes may be considered
as an option in selected patients.99 Retreatment with
platinum-based ChT for those tumours that relapse >1 year
252

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

after previous ChT is a reasonable option, particularly where
ICI therapy is not available [IV, B].
Erdaﬁtinib is a pan-FGFR tyrosine kinase inhibitor of
FGFR1-4 that has been tested in a phase II trial in 99
patients with locally advanced or metastatic previously
treated UC and FGFR DNA genomic alterations (FGFR2 or 3
fusions, or FGFR3 mutations). In this trial, 45% of patients
had previously received only ﬁrst-line platinum-based ChT.9
In a recent update with a median follow-up of 24 months,
conﬁrmed RR in all populations was 39% in ChT-relapsed/refractory patients. Median PFS (mPFS) and mOS were 5.5
months (95% CI 4.0-5.7) and 10.6 months (95% CI 9.0-14.7),
respectively, in ChT-relapsed/-refractory patients.9,100
mPFS and mOS were 5.5 months (95% CI 4.0-5.7)
and 10.6 months (95% CI 9.0-14.7), respectively, in
ChT-relapsed/-refractory patients.9,100 Erdaﬁtinib is
recommended in platinum-refractory tumours with FGFR
alterations [III, B]. No consensus could be reached on
whether second-line ICI therapy or erdaﬁtinib should be
used in preference in these patients.
Treatment of tumours that have relapsed after ﬁrst-line
immunotherapy
There are no prospective randomised data regarding
treatment of patients with progression of disease after ICIs
in advanced UC. Retrospective data support the use of
standard ﬁrst-line platinum-based therapy [IV, B].101 RRs
and PFS are in line with those seen for ﬁrst-line
platinum-based ChT. Recommendations are similar to
those for front-line ChT. Gemcitabine with cisplatin or
carboplatin are the preferred regimens.
EV is an antibody drug conjugate targeting nectin-4.
Monomethyl auristatin E is the payload drug within this
molecule (microtubule-disrupting agent). A single-arm
phase II trial for EV in this population shows RRs of 52%,
PFS of 5.8 months (95% CI 5.0-8.3) and OS of 14.7 months
(95% CI 10.5-18.2).102 This agent can, therefore, be
recommended as an alternative to ChT in this population
irrespective of nectin-4 expression [III, B].
Treatment of ChT and immunotherapy-relapsed disease
This population included third-line therapy after the
sequence of platinum-based ChT and ICIs. It also included
second-line therapy after ﬁrst-line ChT and maintenance
avelumab. EV has been tested in phase II and phase III trials
in advanced disease UC after progression with ChT and ICIs.
Conﬁrmed RRs were 44% (95% CI 35% to 53%) in the phase
II study.103 The phase III trial showed superior RRs
(41% versus 17%), PFS (HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.51-0.75) and OS
(HR 0.70, 95% CI 0.56-0.89; 12.8 versus 9.0 months) for EV
versus ChT (vinﬂunine or taxanes).104 Grade 3 or more
adverse events of special interest associated with the new
class of drug were rash (15%), peripheral neuropathy (5%)
and hyperglycaemia (4%). EV should be considered the
standard of care in this population, which includes patients
with progression of disease after ﬁrst-line ChT and
maintenance avelumab [I, A].
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

The erdaﬁtinib phase II trial described previously
included 22 patients whose tumours had progressed after
immunotherapy and ChT. The RR to erdaﬁtinib was 59% in
this population. mPFS and mOS were 5.7 months (95% CI
4.9-8.3) and 10.9 months (95% CI 8.0-21.1), respectively.100
Therefore, erdaﬁtinib is also recommended, with less robust
evidence, in this FGFR-selected population [III, B].
ChT (taxanes or vinﬂunine) is a less attractive alternative to
EV or erdaﬁtinib in patients who have had progressive disease on platinum-based ChT and ICIs (RR of 21%) [IV, C].105
UTUC
UTUCs account for only 5%-10% of UCs.106,107 Multifocal
tumours are found in 10%-20% of UTUC cases.108 The
presence of concomitant CIS of the upper tract is between
11% and 36%.107
At ﬁrst diagnosis, 60% of UTUCs are invasive compared
with 15%-25% of bladder tumours.109 The most common
histological type is UC; variants are present in up to 25% of
the cases.110 The most common symptom is haematuria
(70%-80%) or ﬂank pain (10%-20%).111,112
The key investigations for UTUC are CT urography and
diagnostic ureteroscopy. During the ureteroscopy, an in situ
cytology sample of the upper tract should be collected,
despite the fact that cytology is less sensitive for UTUC than
UC of the bladder.113
UTUCs invading the muscle wall usually have a poor prognosis. The 5-year cancer-speciﬁc survival is <50% for patients
with pT2-pT3 tumours and <10% for those with pT4.114-116
UTUCs are stratiﬁed into two risk categories, low- and
high-risk tumours. Low-risk tumours include unifocal
tumours of <1 cm, LG disease at cytology/biopsy and
no invasive features on CT urography. High-risk tumours are
>2 cm, with possible hydronephrosis, HG disease at
cytology/biopsy, multifocal disease, variant histology or
previous RC for bladder cancer.116
Kidney-sparing management, such as endoscopic
laser ablation, should be offered as primary treatment
option to patients with low-risk UTUC. High-risk UTUC
patients should undergo open or laparoscopic radical
nephroureterectomy with bladder cuff excision regardless
of tumour location [II, B].109
There are limited studies in UTUC evaluating systemic
therapy in patients with locally advanced or metastatic
disease. Most of the clinical decision making is extrapolated from evidence of the bladder literature and small,
single-centre UTUC studies (<50 patients). Systemic therapy
for advanced disease should follow the recommendations for
urothelial bladder cancer [IV, B]. This included adjuvant
cisplatin-based ChT. A randomised, phase III adjuvant ChT
study [the Peri-Operative chemotherapy versus sUrveillance
in upper Tract urothelial cancer trial (POUT): gemcitabinee
cisplatin/carboplatin versus observation] showed improved
DFS (HR 0.45, 95% CI 0.30-0.68) in patients with locally
advanced UTUC (pT2-T4 pN0-N3 M0 or pT any N1-3 M0).117
The study was not powered for OS (HR 0.7, 95% CI
0.46-1.06). There is evidence to support the use of adjuvant
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

cisplatin-based ChT, based on the POUT data and the OS
meta-analysis for cisplatin-based treatment of urothelial
bladder cancer [II, C]. The role of adjuvant carboplatin-based
treatment is not fully elucidated due to power limitations on
the analyses for the subgroup of patients included in the
POUT trial. Therefore, adjuvant carboplatin-based ChT should
not be recommended at the present time in this setting
[II, D]. The role for adjuvant ICIs in this population is
controversial. Patients with UTUC who were included in
CheckMate 274 study seemed to beneﬁt less from adjuvant
nivolumab compared with the bladder tumour counterpart
and OS data are unavailable. Therefore, at the present time,
ICIs cannot be recommended in this setting.64
Recommendations
Treatment of advanced or metastatic UC in patients ﬁt
enough to tolerate cisplatin-based combination ChT
 Cisplatin-based ChT [I, A] followed by maintenance
avelumab in those tumours not progressing on ChT is
the standard of care [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
Treatment of advanced or metastatic UC in patients not
eligible for cisplatin-based combination ChT
 Gemcitabine/carboplatin [II, B] followed by maintenance
avelumab (in those tumours not progressing on ChT) for
those not eligible for cisplatin-based therapy is the
standard of care [I, A].
 Atezolizumab or pembrolizumab are alternatives for
patients with PD-L1 biomarker-positive tumours who
are not eligible for cisplatin-based combination ChT.
The level of evidence, however, is weaker than for ChT
followed by maintenance avelumab and this approach
requires careful consideration [III, B].
Treatment of relapsed advanced/metastatic UC
 Pembrolizumab has the most robust data for treatment
in the setting of progression of disease after
platinum-based ChT [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
Other ICIs such as atezolizumab can be given with less
robust evidence [II, B-III, C].
 Erdaﬁtinib is an alternative to ICIs in tumours with FGFR
alterations. This has weaker levels of evidence than
pembrolizumab [III, B].
 ChT can be considered instead of best supportive care
when other options are not available (vinﬂunine [II, C];
taxanes [III, C]).
Treatment of tumours that relapse after ﬁrst-line
single-agent immunotherapy
 Randomised data are lacking in immunotherapyrefractory disease. EV [III, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4]
or platinum-based ChT [IV, B] should be given.
Treatment of ChT and immunotherapy-relapsed disease
 EV is recommended as standard treatment in this
population [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
 Erdaﬁtinib is an alternative in patients with FGFR
alterations with a weaker level of evidence [III, B].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

253

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology
 ChT can be considered instead of best supportive care
[IV, B], if clinically appropriate.
 Retreatment with ChT for those patients that relapse
after all other treatment options can be considered.
Single-agent taxane therapy or vinﬂunine can be
considered [IV, C].

Regular (3-4 months) cross-sectional imaging should occur
for 2 years upon completion of systemic therapy. Bone
scans/MRI may be required if CT cannot address these
adequately [IV, B].

Treatment of UTUC
 Kidney-sparing management should be offered to
low-risk UTUC and radical nephroureterectomy with
bladder cuff excision for high-risk UTUC [II, B].
 Systemic therapy recommendations for advanced UTUC
should follow those for advanced bladder cancer [IV, B].
 There is evidence to support the use of adjuvant cisplatinbased ChT based on the POUT data and the OS
meta-analysis for cisplatin-based treatment of UC [II, C].

 Follow-up for NMIBC requires regular cystoscopic
examination according to the patient’s risk category [IV, A].
 Follow-up after curative therapy for MIBC requires
cross-sectional imaging for 5 years. This should include
3-4 monthly imaging for the ﬁrst 2 years. Bladdersparing approaches also require regular cystoscopy [IV, B].
 Follow-up during and after systemic therapy for
advanced UC should focus on regular cross-sectional
imaging of the chest, abdomen and pelvis and other
target lesions [IV, B].

Recommendations

FOLLOW-UP AND LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS
NMIBC

METHODOLOGY

There is no generally accepted follow-up protocol as
recommendations are mainly based on retrospective data.
Therefore, the frequency and duration of cystoscopy and
subsequent imaging should reﬂect the individual patient’s
degree of risk of recurrence and progression [IV, B].11,118 In
all patients with a new diagnosis of Ta-T1 tumours
and/or CIS, the ﬁrst cystoscopy should be carried out at
3-month intervals [IV, B].119 Regular cystoscopy and
cytology is subsequently recommended every 3-6 months
during the ﬁrst 2 years of follow-up, and every 6-12 months
thereafter. Regular upper tract imaging (CT intravenous
urography) is recommended for high-risk tumours.

This Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) was developed in
accordance with the European Society for Medical
Oncology (ESMO) standard operating procedures for Clinical
Practice Guideline development (http://www.esmo.org/
Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology). The relevant
literature has been selected by the expert authors. An ESMOMCBS table with MCBS scores is included in Supplementary
Table S7, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.
2021.11.012. ESMO-MCBS v1.1120 was used to calculate
scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA
and/or the FDA (https://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMOMCBS). The scores have been calculated by the ESMOMCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA approval status of new
therapies/indications is correct at the time of writing this
CPG. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have
been applied using the system shown in Supplementary
Table S8, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.
2021.11.012.121 Statements without grading were considered justiﬁed standard clinical practice by the authors.

MIBC
There is no generally accepted follow-up protocol for
muscle-invasive UC [IV, B]. Current surveillance protocols
are based on patterns of recurrence drawn from
retrospective series. Imaging of the chest, upper tract,
abdomen and pelvis should be carried out to detect relapse
after potentially curative therapy every 3-4 months for 2
years, and then every 6-12 months up to 5 years [IV, B].57
The beneﬁts of follow-up beyond 5 years are unclear and
it is reasonable to discharge patients. UTUC occurs in
4%-10% of cases after RC;32 hence, regular upper tract
imaging is recommended [IV, B].
After bladder-sparing procedures with curative intent,
such as trimodal therapy, follow-up must investigate for
local as well as systemic relapses. Cystoscopic examination
should be carried out every 3-6 months for the ﬁrst 5 years.
CT of the thorax and abdomen is recommended as the
imaging method for follow-up every 3-4 months for the ﬁrst
2 years, and then every 6 months up to 5 years [IV, B].57 The
role of surveillance beyond 5 years is uncertain.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Richard Lutz,
Louise Green and Jennifer Lamarre (ESMO staff). Nathan
Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urani
Dafni, ESMO-MCBS Working Group Member/Frontier
Science Foundation Hellas, and Giota Zygoura of Frontier
Science Foundation Hellas provided review and validation
of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientiﬁc
Affairs staff) provided coordination and support of the
ESMO-MCBS scores and preparation of the ESMO-MCBS
table.
FUNDING

Advanced/metastatic disease
Response evaluation every 2-3 months should occur for
those patients on systemic therapy for advanced disease.
254

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

No external funding has been received for the preparation
of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by
ESMO from central funds.
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

DISCLOSURE
TP has received research funding from Merck Serono,
Merck, Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Roche, Bristol Myers Squibb
(BMS), AstraZeneca, Astellas, Novartis, Johnson and Johnson, Seattle Genetics, Pﬁzer, Exelixis and Eisai and honoraria
from Merck Serono, MSD, Roche, BMS, AstraZeneca,
Astellas, Novartis, Johnson and Johnson, Seattle Genetics,
Pﬁzer, Exelixis and Eisai; JB has received honoraria for
participation in advisory boards from Pﬁzer, AstraZeneca,
Merck and BMS, invited speaker fees from Merck, Genentech and MSD, royalties from UpToDate, institutional
research funding as principal investigator (PI) for MSD and
Pﬁzer, research funding from Takeda and non-remunerated
activities as steering committee member of the IMvigor 011
study; EC has received honoraria from Jansen for invited
speaker and non-remunerated activities in an advisory role
for the EAU guidelines; MDS has received honoraria for
participation in advisory boards and as an invited speaker
for 4D, AAA, Amgen, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Basilea, Bayer,
Bioclin, BMS, EISAI, Ferring, Immunomedics, Ipsen, Janssen,
MSD, Merck Serono, Novartis, Pﬁzer, Pierre Fabre Oncology,
Roche, Sandoz, Sanoﬁ, SeaGen and Amgen and institutional
research as PI and steering committee member for Basilea,
AstraZeneca, MSD, Merck, EISAI, Astellas, SeaGen, Exelixis,
Ipsen, Roche, Immunomedics, Janssen and Calithera; RH has
received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for
Roche, Nektar, BMS, MSD and Astellas, expert testimony for
National Institute of Clinical Excellence and partnership in
the Cancer Centre London, institutional royalties received
from Janssen, research grants from MSD and Roche, local PI
for Roche, MSD, Basilea and Cancer Research UK; patient
funding from Astellas and steering committee member with
Cancer Research UK; YL has received honoraria for lectures,
presentations, speaker’s bureau, manuscript writing or
educational events from BMS, Pﬁzer, Merck KGaA, MSD,
AstraZeneca, Roche, Jansen, Astellas, Seattle Genetics and
Immunomedics and support for attending meetings and/or
travel grants from BMS, Roche, AstraZeneca, MSD and
Pﬁzer; AN has received institutional research grants from
Merck, AstraZeneca, Ipsen and BMS and has undertaken
personal research as a steering committee member for
Roche, Janssen, Bayer, Astellas, AstraZeneca, Merck and
Clovis Oncology; BPV has received honoraria for advisory
boards for Pﬁzer, Astellas Pharma, BMS, Ipsen, EUSA
Pharma, Sanoﬁ-Aventis and Merck and has been an invited
speaker for Janssen, Pﬁzer, BMS, Roche, Bayer, EUSA
Pharma, MSD and Merck; AR has received honoraria for
advisory boards for Pﬁzer, Merck GA, BMS, Ipsen, MSD and
AstraZeneca and has been an invited speaker for Pﬁzer,
Merck GA, BMS, Ipsen and MSD and has received institutional grants from Pﬁzer, Merck GA and Ipsen; SFS has
received honoraria for participation in advisory boards for
Astellas, Janssen, MSD, AstraZeneca, Bayer, BMS, Cepheid,
Ferring Pharmaceuticals, Ipsen, Lilly, Olympus, Pﬁzer, Pierre
Fabre, Richard Wolf, Roche, Sanochemia, Sanoﬁ, Takeda and
UroGen; BS has received honoraria from Ellipses, Ipsen,
Merck, Pﬁzer and Roche and has received travel and
Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

research funding from BMS, Genentech, MSD, Pﬁzer and
Roche; MSvdH has received honoraria (paid to institute) for
participation in advisory boards for BMS, Roche, Seagen,
AstraZeneca, Janssen, Pﬁzer and MSD, stock ownership with
Gilead; and institutional research funding from BMS, Roche,
AstraZeneca and 4SC; SG has received personal honoraria
for participation in advisory boards for Sanoﬁ, Orion, Roche,
Amgen, MSD and Aranda; other honoraria from RSI
Televisione Svizzera Italiana); has been an invited speaker
for ESMO, SAKK, SAMO, Orikata and CACA-GU, speaker’s
bureau for Janssen Cilag; travel grant from ProteoMEdiX,
institutional honoraria for advisory boards for Bayer,
Janssen Cilag, Roche and AAA International including
Independent Data Monitoring Committee; steering committee for Amgen, Menarini Silicon Biosystems, Astellas
Pharma, Tolero Pharmaceuticals, MSD, Pﬁzer, Telixpharma,
BMS and Orion and has received a patent, royalties and
other intellectual property from Method for Biomarker
WO2009138392.

REFERENCES
1. Bray F, Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, et al. Global cancer statistics 2018:
GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for 36
cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2018;68(6):394-424.
2. van Osch FH, Jochems SH, van Schooten FJ, et al. Quantiﬁed relations
between exposure to tobacco smoking and bladder cancer risk: a
meta-analysis of 89 observational studies. Int J Epidemiol. 2016;45(3):
857-870.
3. Burger M, Catto JW, Dalbagni G, et al. Epidemiology and risk factors
of urothelial bladder cancer. Eur Urol. 2013;63(2):234-241.
4. Grifﬁths TR, Charlton M, Neal DE, et al. Treatment of carcinoma in
situ with intravesical bacillus Calmette-Guerin without maintenance.
J Urol. 2002;167(6):2408-2412.
5. Hara T, Takahashi M, Gondo T, et al. Risk of concomitant carcinoma in
situ determining biopsy candidates among primary non-muscleinvasive bladder cancer patients: retrospective analysis of 173
Japanese cases. Int J Urol. 2009;16(3):293-298.
6. Trinh TW, Glazer DI, Sadow CA, et al. Bladder cancer diagnosis with CT
urography: test characteristics and reasons for false-positive and
false-negative results. Abdom Radiol (NY). 2018;43(3):663-671.
7. Humphrey PA, Moch H, Cubilla AL, et al. The 2016 WHO classiﬁcation
of tumours of the urinary system and male genital organs-part B:
prostate and bladder tumours. Eur Urol. 2016;70(1):106-119.
8. Yaﬁ FA, Brimo F, Steinberg J, et al. Prospective analysis of sensitivity
and speciﬁcity of urinary cytology and other urinary biomarkers for
bladder cancer. Urol Oncol. 2015;33(2):66.e25-66.e31.
9. Loriot Y, Necchi A, Park SH, et al. Erdaﬁtinib in locally advanced or
metastatic urothelial carcinoma. N Engl J Med. 2019;381(4):338-348.
10. Sfakianos JP, Cha EK, Iyer G, et al. Genomic characterization of upper
tract urothelial carcinoma. Eur Urol. 2015;68(6):970-977.
11. Sylvester RJ, van der Meijden AP, Oosterlinck W, et al. Predicting
recurrence and progression in individual patients with stage Ta T1
bladder cancer using EORTC risk tables: a combined analysis of 2596
patients from seven EORTC trials. Eur Urol. 2006;49(3):466-475.
discussion 475-467.
12. Cambier S, Sylvester RJ, Collette L, et al. EORTC Nomograms and risk
groups for predicting recurrence, progression, and disease-speciﬁc
and overall survival in non-muscle-invasive stage Ta-T1 urothelial
bladder cancer patients treated with 1-3 years of maintenance bacillus Calmette-Guerin. Eur Urol. 2016;69(1):60-69.
13. Rieken M, Xylinas E, Kluth L, et al. Long-term cancer-speciﬁc outcomes of TaG1 urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Eur Urol.
2014;65(1):201-209.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

255

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology
14. Shariat SF, Karakiewicz PI, Palapattu GS, et al. Outcomes of radical
cystectomy for transitional cell carcinoma of the bladder: a
contemporary series from the Bladder Cancer Research Consortium.
J Urol. 2006;176(6 Pt 1):2414-2422. discussion 2422.
15. Shariat SF, Rink M, Ehdaie B, et al. Pathologic nodal staging score for
bladder cancer: a decision tool for adjuvant therapy after radical
cystectomy. Eur Urol. 2013;63(2):371-378.
16. Siegel C. Bladder cancer: analysis of multi-detector row helical CT
enhancement pattern and accuracy in tumor detection and perivesical staging. J Urol. 2005;174(4 Pt 1):1250-1251.
17. Yang WT, Lam WW, Yu MY, et al. Comparison of dynamic helical CT
and dynamic MR imaging in the evaluation of pelvic lymph nodes in
cervical carcinoma. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2000;175(3):759-766.
18. Barentsz JO, Engelbrecht MR, Witjes JA, et al. MR imaging of the male
pelvis. Eur Radiol. 1999;9(9):1722-1736.
19. Dorfman RE, Alpern MB, Gross BH, et al. Upper abdominal lymph
nodes: criteria for normal size determined with CT. Radiology.
1991;180(2):319-322.
20. Woo S, Panebianco V, Narumi Y, et al. Diagnostic performance of
vesical imaging reporting and data system for the prediction of
muscle-invasive bladder cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Eur Urol Oncol. 2020;3(3):306-315.
21. Stimson CJ, Cookson MS, Barocas DA, et al. Preoperative hydronephrosis predicts extravesical and node positive disease in patients
undergoing cystectomy for bladder cancer. J Urol. 2010;183(5):17321737.
22. Swinnen G, Maes A, Pottel H, et al. FDG-PET/CT for the preoperative
lymph node staging of invasive bladder cancer. Eur Urol. 2010;57(4):
641-647.
23. Sylvester RJ, Oosterlinck W, Holmang S, et al. Systematic review and
Individual patient data meta-analysis of randomized trials comparing
a single immediate instillation of chemotherapy after transurethral
resection with transurethral resection alone in patients with stage
pTa-pT1 urothelial carcinoma of the bladder: which patients beneﬁt
from the instillation? Eur Urol. 2016;69(2):231-244.
24. Malmstrom PU, Sylvester RJ, Crawford DE, et al. An individual patient
data meta-analysis of the long-term outcome of randomised studies
comparing intravesical mitomycin C versus bacillus Calmette-Guerin
for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer. Eur Urol. 2009;56(2):247256.
25. Oddens J, Brausi M, Sylvester R, et al. Final results of an EORTC-GU
cancers group randomized study of maintenance bacillus CalmetteGuerin in intermediate- and high-risk Ta, T1 papillary carcinoma of
the urinary bladder: one-third dose versus full dose and 1 year versus
3 years of maintenance. Eur Urol. 2013;63(3):462-472.
26. Cumberbatch MGK, Foerster B, Catto JWF, et al. Repeat transurethral
resection in non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer: a systematic review.
Eur Urol. 2018;73(6):925-933.
27. Kamat AM, Sylvester RJ, Bohle A, et al. Deﬁnitions, end points, and
clinical trial designs for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer: recommendations from the International Bladder Cancer Group. J Clin
Oncol. 2016;34(16):1935-1944.
28. Arends TJ, van der Heijden AG, Witjes JA. Combined chemohyperthermia: 10-year single center experience in 160 patients with
nonmuscle invasive bladder cancer. J Urol. 2014;192(3):708-713.
29. Tan WS, Panchal A, Buckley L, et al. Radiofrequency-induced thermochemotherapy effect versus a second course of bacillus CalmetteGuerin or Institutional Standard in patients with recurrence of nonmuscle-invasive bladder cancer following induction or maintenance
bacillus Calmette-Guerin therapy (HYMN): a Phase III, open-label,
randomised controlled trial. Eur Urol. 2019;75(1):63-71.
30. Balar AV, Kamat AM, Kulkarni GS, et al. Pembrolizumab monotherapy
for the treatment of high-risk non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer
unresponsive to BCG (KEYNOTE-057): an open-label, single-arm,
multicentre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2021;22(7):919-930.
31. Boorjian SA, Alemozaffar M, Konety BR, et al. Intravesical nadofaragene ﬁradenovec gene therapy for BCG-unresponsive non-muscleinvasive bladder cancer: a single-arm, open-label, repeat-dose clinical
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2021;22(1):107-117.

256

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

32. Gakis G, Black PC, Bochner BH, et al. Systematic review on the fate of
the remnant urothelium after radical cystectomy. Eur Urol.
2017;71(4):545-557.
33. Lee RK, Abol-Enein H, Artibani W, et al. Urinary diversion after radical
cystectomy for bladder cancer: options, patient selection, and outcomes. BJU Int. 2014;113(1):11-23.
34. Simone G, Papalia R, Ferriero M, et al. Stage-speciﬁc impact of
extended versus standard pelvic lymph node dissection in radical
cystectomy. Int J Urol. 2013;20(4):390-397.
35. Bruins HM, Veskimae E, Hernandez V, et al. The impact of the extent
of lymphadenectomy on oncologic outcomes in patients undergoing
radical cystectomy for bladder cancer: a systematic review. Eur Urol.
2014;66(6):1065-1077.
36. Gschwend JE, Heck MM, Lehmann J, et al. Extended versus limited
lymph node dissection in bladder cancer patients undergoing radical
cystectomy: survival results from a prospective, randomized trial. Eur
Urol. 2019;75(4):604-611.
37. Shariat SF, Ehdaie B, Rink M, et al. Clinical nodal staging scores for
bladder cancer: a proposal for preoperative risk assessment. Eur Urol.
2012;61(2):237-242.
38. Afferi L, Zamboni S, Karnes RJ, et al. The impact of treatment modality
on survival in patients with clinical node-positive bladder cancer:
results from a multicenter collaboration. World J Urol. 2021;39(2):
443-451.
39. Abufaraj M, Dalbagni G, Daneshmand S, et al. The role of surgery in
metastatic bladder cancer: a systematic review. Eur Urol. 2018;73(4):
543-557.
40. Abufaraj M, Al-Ani A, AlQudah A, et al. Surgical intervention in patients with urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and lymph node
metastasis. Curr Opin Urol. 2021;31(3):220-225.
41. Tarin TV, Power NE, Ehdaie B, et al. Lymph node-positive bladder
cancer treated with radical cystectomy and lymphadenectomy: effect
of the level of node positivity. Eur Urol. 2012;61(5):1025-1030.
42. Coppin CM, Gospodarowicz MK, James K, et al. Improved local control of invasive bladder cancer by concurrent cisplatin and preoperative or deﬁnitive radiation. The National Cancer Institute of Canada
Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol. 1996;14(11):2901-2907.
43. Hoskin PJ, Rojas AM, Bentzen SM, et al. Radiotherapy with concurrent
carbogen and nicotinamide in bladder carcinoma. J Clin Oncol.
2010;28(33):4912-4918.
44. James ND, Hussain SA, Hall E, et al. Radiotherapy with or without
chemotherapy in muscle-invasive bladder cancer. N Engl J Med.
2012;366(16):1477-1488.
45. Ploussard G, Daneshmand S, Efstathiou JA, et al. Critical analysis of
bladder sparing with trimodal therapy in muscle-invasive bladder
cancer: a systematic review. Eur Urol. 2014;66(1):120-137.
46. Schuettfort VM, Pradere B, Quhal F, et al. Incidence and outcome of
salvage cystectomy after bladder sparing therapy for muscle invasive
bladder cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. World J Urol.
2021;39(6):1757-1768.
47. Feldman AS, Kulkarni GS, Bivalacqua TJ, et al. Surgical challenges and
considerations in Tri-modal therapy for muscle invasive bladder
cancer. Urol Oncol. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.urolonc.2021.01.
013. In press.
48. Rodel C, Grabenbauer GG, Kuhn R, et al. Combined-modality treatment and selective organ preservation in invasive bladder cancer:
long-term results. J Clin Oncol. 2002;20(14):3061-3071.
49. Shipley WU, Zietman AL, Kaufman DS, et al. Selective bladder preservation by trimodality therapy for patients with muscularis propriainvasive bladder cancer and who are cystectomy candidates–the
Massachusetts General Hospital and Radiation Therapy Oncology
Group experiences. Semin Radiat Oncol. 2005;15(1):36-41.
50. Seisen T, Sun M, Lipsitz SR, et al. Comparative effectiveness of trimodal therapy versus radical cystectomy for localized muscle-invasive
urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Eur Urol. 2017;72(4):483-487.
51. Vashistha V, Wang H, Mazzone A, et al. Radical cystectomy compared
to combined modality treatment for muscle-invasive bladder cancer:
a systematic review and meta-analysis. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys.
2017;97(5):1002-1020.

Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology

52. Advanced Bladder Cancer Meta-analysis Collaboration. Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy in invasive bladder cancer: update of a systematic
review and meta-analysis of individual patient data advanced bladder
cancer (ABC) meta-analysis collaboration. Eur Urol. 2005;48(2):202205. discussion 205-206.
53. Zargar H, Shah JB, van Rhijn BW, et al. Neoadjuvant dose dense MVAC
versus gemcitabine and cisplatin in patients with cT3-4aN0M0
bladder cancer treated with radical cystectomy. J Urol. 2018;199(6):
1452-1458.
54. Galsky MD, Pal SK, Chowdhury S, et al. Comparative effectiveness of
gemcitabine plus cisplatin versus methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, plus cisplatin as neoadjuvant therapy for muscle-invasive
bladder cancer. Cancer. 2015;121(15):2586-2593.
55. Pﬁster C, Gravis G, Flechon A, et al. Randomized phase III trial of
dose-dense methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin, or
gemcitabine and cisplatin as perioperative chemotherapy for patients
with muscle-invasive bladder cancer. Analysis of the GETUG/AFU V05
VESPER Trial secondary endpoints: chemotherapy toxicity and pathological responses. Eur Urol. 2021;79(2):214-221.
56. Grossman HB, Natale RB, Tangen CM, et al. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy plus cystectomy compared with cystectomy alone for locally
advanced bladder cancer. N Engl J Med. 2003;349(9):859-866.
57. Horwich A, Babjuk M, Bellmunt J, et al. EAU-ESMO consensus
statements on the management of advanced and variant bladder
cancer-an international collaborative multi-stakeholder effort: under
the auspices of the EAU and ESMO Guidelines Committees. Ann
Oncol. 2019;30(11):1697-1727.
58. Abufaraj M, Foerster B, Schernhammer E, et al. Micropapillary urothelial carcinoma of the bladder: a systematic review and metaanalysis of disease characteristics and treatment outcomes. Eur
Urol. 2019;75(4):649-658.
59. Powles T, Kockx M, Rodriguez-Vida A, et al. Clinical efﬁcacy and
biomarker analysis of neoadjuvant atezolizumab in operable urothelial carcinoma in the ABACUS trial. Nat Med. 2019;25(11):1706-1714.
60. Necchi A, Anichini A, Raggi D, et al. Pembrolizumab as neoadjuvant
therapy before radical cystectomy in patients with muscle-invasive
urothelial bladder carcinoma (PURE-01): an open-label, single-arm,
phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(34):3353-3360.
61. Leow JJ, Martin-Doyle W, Rajagopal PS, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy
for invasive bladder cancer: a 2013 updated systematic review and
meta-analysis of randomized trials. Eur Urol. 2014;66(1):42-54.
62. Sternberg CN, Skoneczna I, Kerst JM, et al. Immediate versus deferred
chemotherapy after radical cystectomy in patients with pT3-pT4 or
Nþ M0 urothelial carcinoma of the bladder (EORTC 30994): an
intergroup, open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol.
2015;16(1):76-86.
63. Bellmunt J, Hussain M, Gschwend JE, et al. Adjuvant atezolizumab
versus observation in muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma (IMvigor010): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase 3 trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2021;22(4):525-537.
64. Bajorin DF, Witjes JA, Gschwend JE, et al. Adjuvant nivolumab versus
placebo in muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2021;384(22):2102-2114.
65. von der Maase H, Hansen SW, Roberts JT, et al. Gemcitabine and
cisplatin versus methotrexate, vinblastine, doxorubicin, and cisplatin
in advanced or metastatic bladder cancer: results of a large, randomized, multinational, multicenter, phase III study. J Clin Oncol.
2000;18(17):3068-3077.
66. Loehrer PJ Sr, Einhorn LH, Elson PJ, et al. A randomized comparison of
cisplatin alone or in combination with methotrexate, vinblastine, and
doxorubicin in patients with metastatic urothelial carcinoma: a
cooperative group study. J Clin Oncol. 1992;10(7):1066-1073.
67. Sternberg CN, de Mulder P, Schornagel JH, et al. Seven year update of
an EORTC phase III trial of high-dose intensity M-VAC chemotherapy
and G-CSF versus classic M-VAC in advanced urothelial tract tumours.
Eur J Cancer. 2006;42(1):50-54.
68. Bellmunt J, von der Maase H, Mead GM, et al. Randomized phase III
study comparing paclitaxel/cisplatin/gemcitabine and gemcitabine/
cisplatin in patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial

Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

69.

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

cancer without prior systemic therapy: EORTC Intergroup Study
30987. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(10):1107-1113.
Rosenberg JE, Ballman KV, Halabi S, et al. CALGB 90601 (Alliance):
randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial
comparing gemcitabine and cisplatin with bevacizumab or placebo in
patients with metastatic urothelial carcinoma. J Clin Oncol.
2019;37(suppl 15):4503.
Rosenberg JE, Ballman KA, Halabi S, et al. Randomized phase III trial
of gemcitabine and cisplatin with bevacizumab or placebo in patients
with advanced urothelial carcinoma: results of CALGB 90601 (Alliance). J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(22):2486-2496.
Powles T, Csoszi T, Ozguroglu M, et al. Pembrolizumab alone or
combined with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy as ﬁrst-line
therapy for advanced urothelial carcinoma (KEYNOTE-361): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2021;22(7):931-945.
Galsky MD, Arija JAA, Bamias A, et al. Atezolizumab with or without
chemotherapy in metastatic urothelial cancer (IMvigor130): a multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2020;395(10236):1547-1557.
Powles T, van der Heijden MS, Castellano D, et al. Durvalumab alone
and durvalumab plus tremelimumab versus chemotherapy in
previously untreated patients with unresectable, locally advanced or
metastatic urothelial carcinoma (DANUBE): a randomised, open-label,
multicentre, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(12):1574-1588.
Galsky MD, Hahn NM, Rosenberg J, et al. Treatment of patients with
metastatic urothelial cancer “unﬁt” for Cisplatin-based chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(17):2432-2438.
De Santis M, Bellmunt J, Mead G, et al. Randomized phase II/III trial
assessing gemcitabine/carboplatin and methotrexate/carboplatin/
vinblastine in patients with advanced urothelial cancer who are unﬁt
for cisplatin-based chemotherapy: EORTC study 30986. J Clin Oncol.
2012;30(2):191-199.
Morales-Barrera R, Bellmunt J, Suarez C, et al. Cisplatin and gemcitabine administered every two weeks in patients with locally
advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma and impaired renal
function. Eur J Cancer. 2012;48(12):1816-1821.
Kim YR, Lee JL, You D, et al. Gemcitabine plus split-dose cisplatin
could be a promising alternative to gemcitabine plus carboplatin for
cisplatin-unﬁt patients with advanced urothelial carcinoma. Cancer
Chemother Pharmacol. 2015;76(1):141-153.
Mourey L, Flechon A, Tosi D, et al. Vefora, GETUG-AFU V06 study:
randomized multicenter phase II/III trial of fractionated cisplatin (CI)/
gemcitabine (G) or carboplatin (CA)/g in patients (pts) with advanced
urothelial cancer (UC) with impaired renal function (IRF)dresults of a
planned interim analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 6):461.
Sonpavde GP, Mariani L, Lo Vullo S, et al. Impact of the number of
cycles of platinum based ﬁrst line chemotherapy for advanced urothelial carcinoma. J Urol. 2018;200(6):1207-1214.
Alva A, Cs}
oszi T, Ozguroglu M, et al. LBA23 Pembrolizumab (P)
combined with chemotherapy (C) vs C alone as ﬁrst-line (1L) therapy
for advanced urothelial carcinoma (UC): KEYNOTE-361. Ann Oncol.
2020;31:S1155.
Galsky MD, Bamias A, Arija JAA, et al. Atezolizumab (atezo) monotherapy versus chemotherapy in previously untreated locally
advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma (mUC): clinical outcomes by PD-L1 status in cisplatin (cis)-ineligible pts from the phase
III IMvigor130 study. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(suppl 6):434.
Vuky J, Balar AV, Castellano D, et al. Long-term outcomes in KEYNOTE052: phase II study investigating ﬁrst-line pembrolizumab in cisplatinineligible patients with locally advanced or metastatic urothelial
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(23):2658-2666.
Balar AV, Galsky MD, Rosenberg JE, et al. Atezolizumab as ﬁrst-line
treatment in cisplatin-ineligible patients with locally advanced and
metastatic urothelial carcinoma: a single-arm, multicentre, phase 2
trial. Lancet. 2017;389(10064):67-76.
Rosenberg JE, Flaig TW, Friedlander TW, et al. Study EV-103: preliminary durability results of enfortumab vedotin plus pembrolizumab
for locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma. J Clin Oncol.
2020;38(suppl 6):441.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

257

T. Powles et al.

Annals of Oncology
85. Powles T, Park SH, Voog E, et al. Maintenance avelumab þ best
supportive care (BSC) versus BSC alone after platinum-based ﬁrst-line
(1L) chemotherapy in advanced urothelial carcinoma (UC): JAVELIN
Bladder 100 phase III interim analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 18):
LBA1.
86. Powles T, Park SH, Voog E, et al. Avelumab maintenance therapy for
advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2020;383(13):1218-1230.
87. Bellmunt J, Necchi A, De Wit R, et al. Pembrolizumab (pembro) versus
investigator’s choice of paclitaxel, docetaxel, or vinﬂunine in recurrent, advanced urothelial cancer (UC): 5-year follow-up from the
phase 3 KEYNOTE-045 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(suppl 15):4532.
88. Necchi A, Fradet Y, Bellmunt J, et al. 919PdThree-year follow-up
from the phase III KEYNOTE-045 trial: pembrolizumab (Pembro)
versus investigator’s choice (paclitaxel, docetaxel, or vinﬂunine) in
recurrent, advanced urothelial cancer (UC). Ann Oncol. 2019;30:v366v367.
89. Powles T, Duran I, van der Heijden MS, et al. Atezolizumab versus
chemotherapy in patients with platinum-treated locally advanced
or metastatic urothelial carcinoma (IMvigor211): a multicentre, openlabel, phase 3 randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2018;391(10122):
748-757.
90. Van der Heijden MS. 2600dAtezolizumab (atezo) vs chemotherapy
(chemo) in patients (pts) with platinum-treated locally advanced or
metastatic urothelial carcinoma (mUC): a long-term overall survival
(OS) and safety update from the Phase III IMvigor211 study. Ann
Oncol. 2019;30:356-402.
91. Petrylak DP, Powles T, Bellmunt J, et al. Atezolizumab (MPDL3280A)
monotherapy for patients with metastatic urothelial cancer: longterm outcomes from a phase 1 study. JAMA Oncol. 2018;4(4):537544.
92. Rosenberg JE, Hoffman-Censits J, Powles T, et al. Atezolizumab in
patients with locally advanced and metastatic urothelial carcinoma
who have progressed following treatment with platinum-based
chemotherapy: a single-arm, multicentre, phase 2 trial. Lancet.
2016;387(10031):1909-1920.
93. Sternberg CN, Loriot Y, James N, et al. Primary results from SAUL, a
multinational single-arm safety study of atezolizumab therapy for
locally advanced or metastatic urothelial or nonurothelial carcinoma
of the urinary tract. Eur Urol. 2019;76(1):73-81.
94. Sharma P, Retz M, Siefker-Radtke A, et al. Nivolumab in metastatic
urothelial carcinoma after platinum therapy (CheckMate 275): a
multicentre, single-arm, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(3):312322.
95. Massard C, Gordon MS, Sharma S, et al. Safety and efﬁcacy of durvalumab (MEDI4736), an anti-programmed cell death ligand-1 immune checkpoint inhibitor, in patients with advanced urothelial
bladder cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(26):3119-3125.
96. Patel MR, Ellerton J, Infante JR, et al. Avelumab in metastatic urothelial carcinoma after platinum failure (JAVELIN Solid Tumor): pooled
results from two expansion cohorts of an open-label, phase 1 trial.
Lancet Oncol. 2018;19(1):51-64.
97. Bellmunt J, Theodore C, Demkov T, et al. Phase III trial of vinﬂunine
plus best supportive care compared with best supportive care alone
after a platinum-containing regimen in patients with advanced
transitional cell carcinoma of the urothelial tract. J Clin Oncol.
2009;27(27):4454-4461.
98. Sonpavde G, Pond GR, Choueiri TK, et al. Single-agent taxane versus
taxane-containing combination chemotherapy as salvage therapy for
advanced urothelial carcinoma. Eur Urol. 2016;69(4):634-641.
99. Raggi D, Miceli R, Sonpavde G, et al. Second-line single-agent versus
doublet chemotherapy as salvage therapy for metastatic urothelial
cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann Oncol.
2016;27(1):49-61.
100. Siefker-Radtke AO, Necchi A, Park SH, et al. ERDAFITINIB in locally
advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma (mUC): long-term outcomes in BLC2001. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 15):5015.
101. Gomez de Liano Lista A, van Dijk N, de Velasco Oria de Rueda G, et al.
Clinical outcome after progressing to frontline and second-line anti-

258

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2021.11.012

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.

107.

108.

109.

110.

111.

112.

113.

114.

115.

116.

117.

118.

119.

120.
121.

PD-1/PD-L1 in advanced urothelial cancer. Eur Urol. 2020;77(2):269276.
Balar AV, McGregor BA, Rosenberg JE, et al. EV-201 Cohort 2:
enfortumab vedotin in cisplatin-ineligible patients with locally
advanced or metastatic urothelial cancer who received prior PD-1/
PD-L1 inhibitors. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(suppl 6):394.
Rosenberg JE, O’Donnell PH, Balar AV, et al. Pivotal trial of enfortumab vedotin in urothelial carcinoma after platinum and antiprogrammed death 1/programmed death ligand 1 therapy. J Clin
Oncol. 2019;37(29):2592-2600.
Powles T, Rosenberg JE, Sonpavde GP, et al. Enfortumab vedotin in
previously treated advanced urothelial carcinoma. N Engl J Med.
2021;384(12):1125-1135.
Szabados B, van Dijk N, Tang YZ, et al. Response rate to chemotherapy
after immune checkpoint inhibition in metastatic urothelial cancer.
Eur Urol. 2018;73(2):149-152.
Munoz JJ, Ellison LM. Upper tract urothelial neoplasms: incidence
and survival during the last 2 decades. J Urol. 2000;164(5):15231525.
Soria F, Shariat SF, Lerner SP, et al. Epidemiology, diagnosis, preoperative evaluation and prognostic assessment of upper-tract urothelial carcinoma (UTUC). World J Urol. 2017;35(3):379-387.
Cosentino M, Palou J, Gaya JM, et al. Upper urinary tract urothelial
cell carcinoma: location as a predictive factor for concomitant bladder
carcinoma. World J Urol. 2013;31(1):141-145.
Margulis V, Shariat SF, Matin SF, et al. Outcomes of radical nephroureterectomy: a series from the Upper Tract Urothelial Carcinoma
Collaboration. Cancer. 2009;115(6):1224-1233.
Rink M, Robinson BD, Green DA, et al. Impact of histological variants
on clinical outcomes of patients with upper urinary tract urothelial
carcinoma. J Urol. 2012;188(2):398-404.
Inman BA, Tran VT, Fradet Y, et al. Carcinoma of the upper urinary
tract: predictors of survival and competing causes of mortality. Cancer. 2009;115(13):2853-2862.
Raman JD, Shariat SF, Karakiewicz PI, et al. Does preoperative
symptom classiﬁcation impact prognosis in patients with
clinically localized upper-tract urothelial carcinoma managed
by radical nephroureterectomy? Urol Oncol. 2011;29(6):716723.
Messer J, Shariat SF, Brien JC, et al. Urinary cytology has a poor
performance for predicting invasive or high-grade upper-tract urothelial carcinoma. BJU Int. 2011;108(5):701-705.
Abouassaly R, Alibhai SM, Shah N, et al. Troubling outcomes from
population-level analysis of surgery for upper tract urothelial carcinoma. Urology. 2010;76(4):895-901.
Jeldres C, Sun M, Isbarn H, et al. A population-based assessment of
perioperative mortality after nephroureterectomy for upper-tract
urothelial carcinoma. Urology. 2010;75(2):315-320.
Lughezzani G, Burger M, Margulis V, et al. Prognostic factors in upper
urinary tract urothelial carcinomas: a comprehensive review of the
current literature. Eur Urol. 2012;62(1):100-114.
Birtle A, Johnson M, Chester J, et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy in upper
tract urothelial carcinoma (the POUT trial): a phase 3, open-label,
randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2020;395(10232):1268-1277.
Fernandez-Gomez J, Madero R, Solsona E, et al. Predicting nonmuscle
invasive bladder cancer recurrence and progression in patients
treated with bacillus Calmette-Guerin: the CUETO scoring model.
J Urol. 2009;182(5):2195-2203.
Palou J, Rodriguez-Rubio F, Millan F, et al. Recurrence at three
months and high-grade recurrence as prognostic factor of progression
in multivariate analysis of T1G2 bladder tumors. Urology. 2009;73(6):
1313-1317.
Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical
Beneﬁt Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340-2366.
Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic
infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin
Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144 (adapted from: Gross PA. Barrett TL,
Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases. Clin Infect Dis. 1994;1918:1421).

Volume 33

-

Issue 3

-

2022

