clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology 26 (Supplement 5): v56–v68, 2015
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv295

Cancer of the pancreas: ESMO Clinical Practice
Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up†
M. Ducreux1,2, A. Sa. Cuhna2,3, C. Caramella4, A. Hollebecque1,5, P. Burtin1, D. Goéré6,
T. Seufferlein7, K. Haustermans8, J. L. Van Laethem9, T. Conroy10 & D. Arnold11, on behalf of the
ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1

Département de médecine, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; 2Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris Sud, le Kremlin Bicêtre; 3Département de Chirugie Hépato-biliaire, Hopital
Paul Brousse, Villejuif; 4Département d’imagerie; 5Département d’Innovation Thérapeutique; 6Département de Chirurgie Générale, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif, France;
7
Department of Internal Medicine I, Ulm University Hospital Medical Center, Ulm, Germany; 8Department of Radiation Oncology, Leuven Kankerinstitute, Leuven;
9
Departement of Gastroenterology, Hôpital Erasme, Cliniques Universitaires de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium; 10Département de médecine, Institut de Cancérologie de
Lorraine, Vandoeuvre lés Nancy, France; 11Department of Medical Oncology, Tumor Biology Center, Freiburg, Germany

clinical practice
guidelines

incidence and epidemiology
A recent study estimating cancer epidemiology in 2014 (within
Europe) showed that pancreatic cancer was the fourth most fatal
cancer in men after lung, colorectal, and prostate cancers [1].
Similarly, pancreatic cancer was found to be the fourth most fatal
cancer in women after breast, colorectal and lung cancers [1].
With a life expectancy of ∼5% at 5 years, the prognosis of this
cancer has not improved over the past 20 years, and incidence
and mortality rates are very similar. Death due to pancreatic carcinoma is increasing in Europe with the number rising from
75 439 in 2009 to a projected 82 300 deaths in 2014 (+19%) [1]. It
usually arises in elderly patients with a mean age at onset of 71
years for men and 75 years for women. The majority of patients
with pancreatic cancer progress to either metastatic or locally
advanced disease in the asymptomatic phase. Surgical excision is
the deﬁnitive treatment with a 5-year survival rate (after resection) of ∼20%, but it is only possible in 15%–20% of the patients.
The opportunity to detect pancreatic cancer, while it remains
curable, depends on the ability to identify and screen high-risk
populations before their symptoms arise. Deﬁning the treatment
strategy for patients suffering from pancreatic carcinoma requires
a specialised multidisciplinary team that includes: surgeons,
medical oncologists, gastroenterologists, radiation therapists, radiologists, and supportive and palliative care specialists.
The vast majority (>80%) of pancreatic carcinomas are due
to sporadically occurring mutations. Only a small proportion
(<10%) are due to inherited germline mutations. Germline
mutations in BRCA2, p16, ATM, STK11, PRSS1/PRSS2, SPINK1,
PALB2, and DNA mismatch repair genes are associated with
varying degrees of increased risk for pancreatic carcinoma [2].
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via L. Taddei 4,
CH-6962 Viganello-Lugano, Switzerland.
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org
†

Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: February 2002, last update July 2015.
This publication supersedes the previously published version—Ann Oncol 2013; 24
(Suppl. 6): vi106–vi114.

Familial pancreatic cancers, deﬁned as at least two ﬁrst-degree
relatives with pancreatic cancer, account for only 5%–10% of all
pancreatic cancer cases. Mutation in BRCA2 is probably the
most common inherited disorder in familial pancreatic cancer.
Other familial syndromes linked to pancreatic cancer are: hereditary pancreatitis, hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer,
hereditary breast and ovarian cancers, Peutz–Jeghers syndrome,
ataxia telangiectasia, familial atypical multiple mole melanoma
syndrome and Li–Fraumeni syndrome.
The main acquired risk factors for pancreatic cancer are cigarette
smoking (overall relative risk 1.74) and, to a lesser degree, environmental tobacco smoke. The second most modiﬁable risk factor of
pancreatic cancer is obesity. Tumorigenesis is enhanced by excess
adipose tissue, probably through the mechanism of abnormal
glucose metabolism. Obesity [body mass index (BMI) > 30 kb/m2]
is associated with a 20%–40% higher rate of death from pancreatic
cancer. Meta-analyses have demonstrated associations between
both type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus and pancreatic cancer,
with odds ratios of ∼2.0 and 1.8, respectively [2].
Chronic pancreatitis accounts for ∼5% of pancreatic cancers.
The most common cause of chronic pancreatitis, in Europe, is
excess alcohol consumption. The causal pathway is not clear,
however, alcohol consumption by itself is related to an increased
risk of pancreatic cancer.
Helicobacter pylori, hepatitis B, and human immunodeﬁciency virus infection have also been reported to be related to an
increase in relative risk of pancreatic cancer, although some confounding factors such as cigarette smoking or alcohol consumption have not always been considered [2].
Dietary factors have been studied extensively, and clearly contribute to the development of pancreatic cancer. Independent of
their role in causing obesity: butter, saturated fat, red meat, and
processed foods are clearly linked to pancreatic cancer [3].
Conversely, a high fruit and folate intake could reduce the risk of
pancreatic cancer [3].
Different chemical substances have been reported to increase
the relative risk of developing pancreatic cancer, among these

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European Society for Medical Oncology.
All rights reserved. For permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology

key points

Table 1. Major non-genetic risk factors [5]a
Factor

Relative risk

Attributable fraction

Tobacco
Helicobacter pylori infection
Non-O-blood group
Diabetes mellitus
Obesity
Red meat intake
Heavy alcohol intake
Low fruit and folate intake

2
1.5
1.4
1.4–2.2
1.2–1.5
1.1–1.5
1.1–1.5
0.5–1.0

11%–32%
4%–25%
13%–19%
1%–16%
3%–16%
2%–9%
9%
<12%

a

By permission of Oxford University Press on behalf of The
International Epidemiological Association.

are: chlorobenzoil, chlorinated hydrocarbon, nickel and nickel
compounds, chromium compounds, silica dust, and others [4].
A recent pooled analysis of 117 meta-analytical studies [5]
assigned a relative risk to a number of these factors improving
our understanding of the respective role of each factor (Table 1).
As a summary, it is possible to say that 5%–10% of pancreatic
cancers are related to a genetic alteration. Among the remaining
90%, the major risk factors are tobacco, H. pylori infection and
factors related to dietary habits (BMI, red meat intake, low fruit
and vegetables intake, diabetes, alcohol intake). Some factors are
difﬁcult to interpret such as chronic pancreatitis, which is known
as a risk factor but can be related to alcohol intake. Diabetes is
also known as a risk factor but this could be the initial symptom
of the disease, and can also be found in chronic pancreatitis.
However, about two thirds of the major risk factors associated
with pancreatic cancer are potentially modiﬁable, affording a
unique opportunity for preventing one of the deadliest cancers.
key points

• 5%–10% of pancreatic cancers are due to genetic alteration
• The main risk factors are tobacco, and factors related to
dietary habits (BMI, red meat intake, low fruit and vegetables
intake, diabetes, alcohol intake)

diagnosis and pathology/molecular
biology
diagnosis
Early symptoms of pancreatic cancer result from a mass effect.
Approximately 60%–70% of pancreatic cancer arises in the head
of the pancreas, 20%–25% in the body and the tail, and the
remaining 10%–20% diffusely involve the pancreas. Tumours
located in the body and the tail are likely to be diagnosed at a
more advanced stage than tumours located in the head, as these
can develop symptoms related to an obstruction of the common
bile duct and/or the pancreatic duct. Common presenting symptoms of pancreatic cancers include jaundice (for tumours of the
head), abdominal pain, weight loss, steatorrhoea, and new-onset
diabetes. Tumours can grow locally into the duodenum ( proximal for tumour of the head and distal for tumour of the body
and tail) and result in an upper gastroduodenal obstruction.

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

• Early symptoms of pancreatic cancer result from a mass effect
• Common presenting symptoms include jaundice, pain, weight
loss, steatorrhoea

pathology
Pancreatic cancers arise from both the exocrine and endocrine
parenchyma of the gland, however, ∼95% occur within the exocrine portion and may arise from ductal epithelium, acinar cells,
or connective tissue. Only 2% of tumours of the exocrine pancreas are benign. The most common pancreatic cancer is a ductal
adenocarcinoma, which accounts for ∼80% of all pancreatic
cancers. Microscopically, these neoplasms vary from well-differentiated duct-forming carcinomas (which may be so well differentiated that they mimic non-neoplastic glands) to poorly
differentiated carcinomas, with epithelial differentiation demonstrable only on immunolabelling. Ductal adenocarcinomas typically elicit an intense stromal reaction which has been postulated to
serve as a barrier to chemotherapy [6]. A number of morphological
variants of ductal carcinoma have been characterised, including
colloid carcinoma and medullary carcinoma. Other variants of
pancreatic cancer, such as adenosquamous carcinoma and undifferentiated carcinomas with osteoclast-like giant cells, are important
to recognise because they are associated with a poorer prognosis.
On the contrary, acinar cell pancreatic cancers have a slightly
better prognosis [7]. Neuroendocrine tumours of the pancreas are
the second most frequent pancreatic cancers, but they have a very
speciﬁc pattern that will not be considered in this paper.
Cystic neoplasms represent 10%–15% of cystic lesions of the
pancreas [8]. The most commonly encountered cystic neoplasms include: serous cystadenoma, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm (IPMN), and mucinous cystic neoplasm
(either cystadenoma or cystadenocarcinoma). Mucinous lesions
have potential for malignant progression and/or may harbour a
malignancy at the time of diagnosis. The non-mucinous lesions
have no malignant potential.
key points

• 95% of pancreatic cancers are adenocarcinomas
• Mucinous lesions of the pancreas have potential for malignant
progression

molecular biology
The classical precursor lesions of pancreatic cancer show a ductal
phenotype, suggesting their ductal cell of origin. The most
frequent precursors are microscopic pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN), followed by IPMN and mucinous cystic neoplasm.
PanIN are microscopic (<5 mm) mucinous-papillary lesions,
which lead to invasive carcinoma through an adenoma-carcinoma
sequence [9]. Similarly, IPMN and mucinous cystic neoplasms
become neoplastic by stepwise gene alterations.
Multiple combinations of genetic mutations are commonly
found in pancreatic cancers and can be classiﬁed as follows:
(i) Mutational activation of oncogenes, predominantly KRAS
found in >90% of pancreatic cancers.
(ii) Inactivation of tumour suppressor genes such as TP53,
p16/CDKN2A, and SMAD4.

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv295 | v

clinical practice guidelines

Annals of Oncology

(iii) Inactivation of genome maintenance genes, such as hMLH1
and MSH2, which control the repair of DNA damage. Most
of these mutations are somatic aberrations.
Many efforts to understand the genomics of pancreatic cancer
have evolved from the model system and especially cell lines.
However, cell lines are poor models of cancer since solid tumour
samples consist of a variety of tissues which may comprise only a
small proportion of tumour cells. Adjacent to and surrounding
these are the other tissues consisting of stroma and endothelial
cells. This is particularly the case in pancreatic cancer, since the
tumour contains a high content of stromal tissue. An analysis
using whole-genome sequencing and copy number variation analysis was recently carried out in 100 pancreatic ductal adenocarcinomas [10]. Chromosomal rearrangements, leading to gene
disruption were prevalent, affecting genes known to be important
in pancreatic cancer (TP53, SMAD4, CDKN2A, ARID1A, and
ROBO2) and new candidate drivers of pancreatic carcinogenesis
(KDM6A and PREX2). Patterns of structural variation in chromosomes classiﬁed pancreatic cancer into four subtypes with potential clinical utility. The subtypes were termed: stable, locally
rearranged, scattered, and unstable.
key points

• The most frequent precursors are microscopic PanIN, fol-

Figure 1. Diagnostic work-up before multidisciplinary decision. CT, computed tomography.

lowed by IPMN and mucinous cystic neoplasm

• Multiple combinations of genetic mutations are commonly
found in pancreatic cancers
• Some of the recent genetic mutations discovered could become
targetable in the near future

staging and risk assessment
CA 19-9 is not useful for the primary diagnosis of pancreatic
cancer [I, E]. An increase in serum levels is seen in almost 80%
of the patients with advanced disease. However, in patients not
harbouring a functional Lewis enzyme (Lea-b- genotype: 7%–10%
of the population), levels of CA 19-9 are typically undetectable or
below 1.0 U/ml. Conversely, the level of CA 19-9 is correlated to
the level of bilirubin and any cause of cholestasis is able to induce
false-positive results. CA 19-9 has a signiﬁcant value as a prognostic factor and can be used as a marker to measure disease
burden and potentially guide treatment decisions. A preoperative
serum CA 19-9 level ≥500 UI/ml clearly indicates a worse prognosis after surgery [IV, B] (Figure 1).
The imaging work-up must determine the tumour size and
precise burden, as well as arterial and venous local involvement.
All these factors are part of the TNM classiﬁcation (Table 2). In
case of jaundice due to an obstructive cancer of the head of the
pancreas, a metal biliary stent should not be placed before initial
work-up, because their use is linked to an increase of postoperative morbidity if it is decided to resect the cancer [III, A].
In case of biliary sepsis, plastic stents should be preferred.
Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) is now largely used in the staging
of adenocarcinoma. A recent meta-analysis study showed that EUS
had limited value in the detection of all metastatic lymph nodes
[sensitivity (Se) 69%, speciﬁcity (Sp) 81%], but was valuable in the
detection of vascular invasion (Se 85%, Sp 91%) and prediction of
resectability (Se 90%, Sp 86%) [11].

v | Ducreux et al.

The great advantage of EUS is its ability to provide tissue
samples, via ﬁne-needle aspiration, that allow up to 95% diagnostic
accuracy (when carried out by an experienced cytopathologist).
Aside from allowing the diagnosis of pancreatic adenocarcinoma,
this technique also permits the sampling of atypical lymph nodes
(portocaval especially) to check for tumours with distant metastasis,
a ﬁnding which would contraindicate radical resection. Incidental
hepatic metastases can also be sampled during the same procedure
without introducing any major risk [II, A].
Radiological studies should include computed tomography
(CT) angiography at the pancreatic arterial (40–50 s) and portal
venous (65–70 s) phases. A consensus statement, describing a
standardised reporting template, was recently developed to
provide a precise reporting of disease staging and to improve the
decision-making process for patients with pancreatic cancer
[12]. When assessing vessel involvement, the use of magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) is left to expert discretion. It shows
equal beneﬁt to CT scanning with no superiority demonstrated
in studies [13]. However, MRI is useful for solving problems
such as the detection of hepatic lesions that cannot be characterised by CT [II, A]. MRI and magnetic resonance cholangiopancratography may also be preferable for cystic neoplasms of
the pancreas and to evaluate biliary anatomy [IV, C].
In the majority of cases, pancreatic adenocarcinoma appears
in the pancreatic arterial phase on CT examination, as a hypoattenuating homogeneous mass with indistinct margins. The
interruption (with or without dilatation) of the biliary duct is fundamental to specify tumour extension. The presence of calciﬁcations is very unlikely but a cystic part of the tumour can exist,
especially when the tumour originates from a degenerating cystic
pancreatic lesion. Extra-pancreatic local extension has to be delineated: enlarged lymph nodes (especially in the retroportal space),
hepatic or peritoneal nodules are the main metastatic sites.

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

Annals of Oncology

Table 2. TNM classification 7th editiona
Primary tumour (T)
T0 = No evidence of primary tumour
Tis = Carcinoma in situ
T1 = Tumour limited to the pancreas, ≤2 cm in greatest dimension
T2 = Tumour limited to the pancreas, >2 cm in greatest dimension
T3 = Tumour extends beyond the pancreas but without involvement of
the coeliac axis or the superior mesenteric artery
T4 = Tumour involves the coeliac axis or the superior mesenteric artery
(unresectable primary tumour)
Regional lymph nodes (N)
NX = Regional lymph nodes cannot be assessed
N0 = No regional lymph node metastasis
N1 = Regional lymph node metastasis
(A minimum number of 10 lymph nodes analysed is recommended.)
The regional lymph nodes are the peripancreatic nodes which may be
subdivided as follows:
Superior
Inferior
Anterior
Posterior
Splenic
Coeliac

Superior to head and body
Inferior to head and body
Anterior pancreaticoduodenal, pyloric (for tumours of head
only), and proximal mesenteric
Posterior pancreaticoduodenal, common bile duct, and
proximal mesenteric
Hilum of spleen and tail of pancreas (for tumours of body
and tail only)
For tumours of head only

Distant metastasis (M)
M1

Distant metastasis

clinical practice guidelines
must be described [III, B]. Performance and nutritional status,
as well as medical comorbidities, are important considerations
for all patients with pancreatic cancer, who are being considered
for any major treatment modalities (surgery, chemotherapy, or
radiation). Advanced age is not a contraindication for any of
these treatments.
Biopsy is indicated for patients requiring a diagnosis, such as
patients initiating chemotherapy or chemoradiation. EUS-guided
ﬁne-needle aspiration allows preoperative tissue conﬁrmation of
malignancy, but fear of tumour cell dissemination along the
needle track has limited its use. A recent study has indicated that
it could be carried out without consequence on efﬁcacy of surgery
[16]. It must be recommended, especially in doubtful cases.
Percutaneous biopsy of a liver metastasis can be used in metastatic disease, but percutaneous biopsy of the pancreas is contra-indicated in potentially resectable cases [III, B].
Positron emission tomography/CT does not currently add
much staging information in most patients with resectable
disease and cannot be recommended; its role will be clariﬁed by
on-going studies.
Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography and pancreatography
(ERCP) is considered as pathognomonic when it shows a
double stop on the main bile and pancreatic ducts. However,
ERCP had little diagnostic value over CT or MRI for the evaluation of patients with pancreatic cancer [III, B].
The additional use of staging laparoscopy to exclude peritoneal metastasis in resectable or borderline resectable patients has
been suggested by some authors, but it is not generally accepted
[14] [IV, C].
key points

• CA 19-9 is the most useful tumour marker in pancreatic
a

By permission of the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC),
Chicago, Illinois. The original source for this material is the AJCC
Cancer Staging Handbook, Seventh Edition (2010) published by
Springer Science and Business Media LLC, www.springer.com.

According to the American Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Association
consensus report, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (when metastases are absent) is classiﬁed as resectable, borderline resectable or
unresectable [14]. At the time of diagnosis, pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma is deemed resectable in only 15%–20% of patients.
For arterial vessels, three situations can exist: vessel tumour
contact <180° without deformation, more than 180° without deformation, or with deformation (i.e. abutment). For venous vessels,
one supplementary situation is described: tear drop deformation at
the tumour contact (i.e. distortion). With the use of such criteria,
CT or MRI are able to determine the non-resectability of the
tumour with a high positive predictive value (>90%), but have an
insufﬁcient predictive value to afﬁrm resectability (<50%) [15].
Each vessel—superior mesenteric artery (SMA), coeliac axis,
and common hepatic artery—has to be assessed individually
with attention paid to local encasement or abutment and a possible anatomic variant, as these can be crucial for the surgical
decision making. The portal vein (PV) and the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) are the major trunks; any local involvement,
thrombus, or hazy attenuation of the fat surrounding the vessel,

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

cancer [IV, B]

• Staging of the patient is initially done by CT scan
• EUS provides some complementary information and allows
biopsy of the tumour [II, A]

• MRI should be discussed, especially in cystic lesions [IV, C]

treatment
At the end of the staging procedures, the tumour can be categorised as resectable, borderline resectable, locally advanced or
metastatic disease. A treatment decision must be taken in accordance with these ﬁndings, including general and nutritional
status considerations.

treatment of localised disease
Surgical resection is the only potentially curative treatment of pancreatic adenocarcinoma. However, at diagnosis, <20% of patients
have a resectable tumour. The main goal of surgery is to achieve
negative (R0) resection margins. After radiological evaluation,
only patients with a high probability of R0 resection are good candidates for upfront surgery.

resectability criteria
An expert consensus group has developed criteria to deﬁne
tumour resectability, to improve patient selection and the rate of

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv295 | v

clinical practice guidelines
R0 resections [14, 17, 18]. According to the degree of contact
between the tumour and the vessels (PV or SMV, SMA, coeliac
trunk, and common hepatic artery), tumours are classiﬁed as resectable, borderline resectable or locally advanced [IV, B]. For
patients with resectable tumours, upfront surgery remains the
standard of care. Patients with borderline resectable tumours
have a high probability of R1 resection and, as such, should not
be considered as good candidates for upfront surgery. Patients
with locally advanced or metastatic disease have to be considered
as having unresectable tumours. These criteria (which should be
considered when deﬁning resectability) [19] have been adopted
in the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines (Table 3) [IV, B].

resection and margins
The location and the size of the tumour determine the type of
surgery. Patients with tumours in the head of the pancreas are
treated with pancreatoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure).
Dissection of the right hemi-circumference of the SMA to the
right of the coeliac trunk is recommended to obtain a good
medial clearance and to improve the rate of R0 resection [20]. In
the event of vein involvement, complete venous resection (PV or
SMV) followed by reconstruction to obtain R0 resection is possible. However, PV or SMV resection is associated with a lower
rate of R0 resection and poor survival, likely due to the inherent
aggressiveness of the tumour [21] [IV, B]. Arterial resections
during pancreatoduodenectomy are associated with increased
morbidity and mortality, and are not recommended. Frozen sections analysis of pancreatic neck transection and common bile
duct transection margins is recommended [IV, E].
The International Study Group of Pancreatic Surgery [18] has
recently recommended adhering to the guidelines from British
Royal College of Pathologists (RCpath) for specimen examination and the R1 deﬁnition (margin <1 mm). They advise surgeons to identify the following margins: anterior, posterior,
medial, or superior mesenteric groove, SMA, pancreatic transection, bile duct, and enteric. Tumour clearance should be given
for all seven margins [IV, B].
For patients with tumours in the body or tail of the pancreas,
distal pancreatectomy, including the resection of the body and the
tail of the pancreas and the spleen, is usually carried out. Radical
anterograde modular pancreatosplenectomy, with dissection of the
left hemi-circumference of the SMA, to the left of the coeliac trunk,
is recommended to ensure R0 resection [22] [IV, A].
Some recent studies show that minimally invasive techniques
(laparoscopy) can reduce the morbidity of pancreatectomies
without having a negative impact on cancer outcome [23].
However, data relating to these techniques are insufﬁcient, particularly in relation to oncological results [24]. Therefore, open surgery
remains the standard of care [II, C].

lymphadenectomy
In pancreatic cancer, extended lymphadenectomy is not recommended. Standard lymphadenectomy for pancreatoduodenectomy should resect the following lymph nodes:

• Suprapyloric (station 5)
• Infrapyloric (station 6)
v | Ducreux et al.

Annals of Oncology

• Anteriosuperior group along the common hepatic artery
•
•
•
•
•
•

(station 8a)
Along the bile duct (station 12b)
Around the cystic duct (station 12c)
On the posterior aspect of the superior (station 13a)
On the inferior portion of the head of pancreas (station 13a)
On the right lateral side of SMA (station 14a and 14b)
On the anterior surface of the superior (station 17a) and inferior portion of the head of pancreas (station 17b)

For tumours of the body and tail of the pancreas, removal of the
following lymph nodes is recommended:

• At the splenic hilum (station 10)
• Along the splenic artery (station 11)
• The inferior margin of pancreas
Standard lymphadenectomy should involve the removal of
≥15 lymph nodes to allow adequate pathologic staging of the
disease. The total number of lymph nodes examined and lymph
nodes ratio (number of involved lymph nodes/number of lymph
nodes examined) should be reported in the pathologic analysis
[25] [IV, A].

age and pancreatectomy
Some authors have proposed a score that accurately predicts the
risk of perioperative mortality in patients undergoing pancreatic
resection. This surgical outcomes analysis and research (SOAR)
pancreatectomy score is calculated based on preoperative factors
(http://www.umassmed.edu/surgery/toolbox/panc_mortality_
custom/) [26][IV, C].

preoperative biliary drainage
A recent prospective and randomised trial demonstrated an
increased complication rate associated with routine preoperative
biliary drainage [27] [I, E]. However, patients in the trial had a
total bilirubin level below 250 µmol/l. Therefore, the correct approach in patients with higher levels remains undeﬁned. If jaundice is present at diagnosis of pancreatic carcinoma, endoscopic
drainage should only be carried out preoperatively in patients
with active cholangitis, or in those whom resection for cure
cannot be scheduled within 2 weeks of diagnosis, and in those
with a bilirubin level below 250 µmol/l.

adjuvant treatment after surgical resection
Considering the poor results of surgery alone in pancreatic carcinoma, many efforts involving chemotherapy, radiotherapy or
both have been made to improve the 5-year survival of these
patients.

adjuvant chemotherapy
Postoperative adjuvant chemotherapy was evaluated in several
randomised trials. In the ESPAC-1 multicentre randomised
trial, a 2 × 2 factorial design, 289 patients treated with curative
resection and complete gross resection received one of four
therapeutic modalities: exclusive adjuvant chemotherapy [bolus
5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) and folinic acid], chemoradiation only
(split course 40 Gy plus 5-FU), or chemoradiation followed by
chemotherapy or surveillance alone [28]. Patients who received
chemotherapy had a longer median survival (20.1 versus 15.5

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

Annals of Oncology

clinical practice guidelines

Table 3. Definition of resectability according to NCCN guidelines [19]
Resectability
status

Arterial

Venous

Resectable

No arterial tumour contact [coeliac axis (CA), superior
mesenteric artery (SMA), or common hepatic artery (CHA)]

No tumour contact with the superior mesenteric vein (SMV), or
portal vein (PV) or <180° contact without vein contour
irregularity

Borderline
resectable

Pancreatic head/uncinate process
Solid tumour with CHA without extension to coeliac axis or
hepatic artery bifurcation allowing for safe and complete
resection and reconstruction
• Solid tumour contact with the SMA <180°
• Presence of variant arterial anatomy (e.g. accessory right
hepatic artery) and the presence and degree of tumour contact
should be noted if present as it may affect surgical planning

•

•

•

Solid tumour contact with the SMV or PV of >180°, contact of
<180° with contour irregularity of the vein or thrombosis of the
vein but with suitable vessels proximal and distal to the site of
involvement allowing for safe and complete resection and vein
reconstruction
Solid tumour contact with the inferior vena cava (IVC)

Pancreatic body/tail
Solid tumour contact with the CA of <180°
Solid tumour contact with the CA of >180° without
involvement of the aorta and with intact and uninvolved
gastroduodenal artery (some members prefer these criteria to
be in the unresectable category)

•
•

Unresectable

•

Distant metastases
Pancreatic head/uncinate process
• Solid tumour contact with SMA >180°
• Solid tumour contact with the CA >180°
• Solid tumour contact with the first jejunal SMA branch

•

Body and tail
Solid tumour contact with the SMA and CA
Solid tumour contact with the CA and aorta

•

•
•

months, P = 0.009) compared with patients who did not. The
results of the CONKO-001 trial comparing gemcitabine to observation conﬁrmed the beneﬁt of adjuvant chemotherapy [29].
Gemcitabine administered for 24 weeks improved disease-free
survival (13.4 versus. 6.9 months, P < 0.001) and overall survival
(OS) (22.8 versus 20.2 months, P = 0.005). The ESPAC-3 trial
compared the administration of adjuvant chemotherapy with
six cycles of either ﬂuorouracil and folinic acid or gemcitabine
[30]. No difference in OS, recurrence-free quality of life or survival was observed. Recent information suggests that gemcitabine may only be effective in patients with the enzymatic
equipment to transport gemcitabine into the tumour cell
(hENT1) and metabolically activate it [31]. Unfortunately, there
is no sufﬁciently reliable commercial immunohistochemical
antibody allowing the routine use of this test before giving gemcitabine, and this is still not a factor when selecting a chemotherapy regimen. At present, both 5-FU/folinic acid and
gemcitabine can be considered as a standard of care [I, A].

adjuvant chemoradiation
Three randomised trials compared the beneﬁts of adjuvant chemoradiation after pancreatic resection against surveillance alone. A
ﬁrst trial by the GastroIntestinal Tumour Study Group evaluating
chemoradiation (40 Gy + 5-FU) was stopped prematurely after the
treatment of 40 patients. An interim analysis revealed a low rate of
inclusion and a signiﬁcant difference in survival in favour of the
chemoradiation arm. After the many criticisms made against this

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

Pancreatic head/uncinate process
Unreconstructible SMV/PV due to tumour involvement or
occlusion (can be due to tumour or bland thrombus)
• Contact with most proximal draining jejunal branch into SMV
Body and tail
Unreconstructible SMV/PV due to tumour involvement or
occlusion (can be due to tumour or bland thrombus)

ﬁrst trial, the EORTC trial compared chemoradiation with simple
surveillance after pancreaticoduodenectomy. In the subgroup of
114 patients with pancreatic tumour(s), the survival beneﬁt for adjuvant chemoradiation was not signiﬁcant. The ESPAC-1 trial has
even suggested a deleterious effect of adjuvant chemoradiation,
with recurrence-free survival of 10.7 months in the chemoradiation
group versus 15.2 months in its absence (P = 0.04) [28]. Even in
R1 patients, no beneﬁt was observed with adjuvant chemoradiation. Thus, no chemoradiation should be given to patients after
surgery except in clinical trials [I, E].
recommendations for treatment of localised disease

• A multidisciplinary team is necessary
• Tumour clearance should be given for all seven margins
identiﬁed by the surgeon [IV, B]

• Standard lymphadenectomy should involve the removal of
≥15 lymph nodes to allow adequate pathologic staging of the
disease [IV, A]
• Adjuvant treatment is done with either gemcitabine or 5-FU
folinic acid [I, A]
• No chemoradiation should be given to patients after surgery
except in clinical trials [I, E]

treatment of non-resectable disease
In 30%–40% of patients, while the tumour is conﬁned to the
pancreatic region, resection is not feasible, mainly due to

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv295 | v

clinical practice guidelines
vascular invasion. The division of this subgroup of patients into
two different categories has been shown recently but it is not
always easy to deﬁne.

borderline resectable lesions
Tumours are considered resectable upon good response to neoadjuvant treatment including induction chemotherapy, preoperative
chemoradiation or a combination of both. Small retrospective
studies and two meta-analyses, including patients with both borderline and resectable lesions, have reported an even better survival for these patients than for those with immediately resectable
tumours [32, 33]. While the heterogeneity of the trials on neoadjuvant therapy in borderline resectable pancreatic cancer limits
the power of any conclusion, many individual series demonstrate
improved R0 resection rates and promising survival rates. The
majority of studies used full-dose radiotherapy paired either with
capecitabine, 5-FU or reduced doses of gemcitabine, or even a
combination of gemcitabine plus oxaliplatin. It is impossible at
this time to recommend any chemoradiation treatment other than
the classical combination of capecitabine and radiotherapy [IV, C].
To improve the disease control and to intensify the treatment of
the systemic disease, it has recently been proposed to begin treatment with chemotherapy before starting chemoradiation. Again,
due to heterogeneity of the small retrospective series, it is very difﬁcult to recommend a speciﬁc schedule of treatment, although
some series have reported better survival using a multimodal strategy than that observed with upfront surgery in patients with
clearly resectable tumours [34]. Recent chemotherapy regimens,
such as FOLFIRINOX [folinic acid (leucovorin)/5-FU/irinotecan/
oxaliplatin], have already shown promising results in small series
of patients with borderline resectable lesions [30%–45% of
objective response rate (ORR)]. A trial, which was stopped
prematurely, reported interesting response rates, median progression-free survival (PFS) and OS for patients treated with
chemotherapy (gemcitabine) followed by chemoradiation (gemcitabine, 5-FU, cisplatin) versus chemoradiation alone [35].
However, this small trial does not allow any deﬁnite conclusions
to be drawn. Patients with borderline resectable lesions should
be included in clinical trials wherever possible. If this is not feasible, a period of chemotherapy followed by chemoradiation and
then surgery appears to be the best option [IV, B].
recommendations for treatment of borderline resectable disease

• Patients with borderline resectable lesions should be included
in clinical trials wherever possible

• In routine practice, if the patient is not included in a trial, a
period of chemotherapy (gemcitabine or FOLFIRINOX) followed by chemoradiation and then surgery appears to be the
best option [IV, B]

Annals of Oncology

the overall median survival of the patients treated with chemotherapy alone was 16 months. This may be related to more
active treatment of the patients diagnosed with metastasis.
When compared with best supportive care, chemoradiation
showed a beneﬁt in terms of survival in a small phase III trial [37].
Old trials suggested the superiority of chemoradiation over
radiotherapy and chemotherapy alone, which was conﬁrmed by
meta-analyses [38] [I, B].
Concerning the comparison with chemotherapy alone, while
poor-quality randomised trials have suggested a beneﬁt in
favour of chemoradiation, two recent trials showed opposite
results. In a French trial using an obsolete regimen of chemoradiation (50 Gy + 5-FU cisplatin), the survival was better in the
gemcitabine alone arm (13 versus 8.6 months [39]). In another
trial, comparing chemoradiation with gemcitabine plus radiotherapy versus gemcitabine alone, the OS was signiﬁcantly
improved in the chemoradiation arm (11.1 versus 9.2 months)
yet toxicity also increased by combining the treatment modalities [40] [II, C].
While many trials have evaluated the best combined regimen
of chemotherapy and radiotherapy, no clear deﬁnition has been
made of a standard of care. For instance, it has been suggested
that gemcitabine could be a better sensitiser and chemotherapeutic agent to combine with radiotherapy than ﬂuoropyrimidines in the treatment of locally advanced pancreatic cancer.
However, evidence from one randomised trial favoured capecitabine as less toxic and more active than gemcitabine in this
setting [41] [I, E].
In an attempt to combine the advantages of both chemotherapy and chemoradiation, the use of chemoradiation in patients
showing no sign of progressive disease after 3 months of chemotherapy alone was suggested to be beneﬁcial. However, no clear
advantage in favour of the chemoradiation was found in a recent
large randomised trial investigating this strategy. This trial was
planned to include 722 patients, and was stopped for futility
after the inclusion of 449 patients (only 269 assessable for the
main end point, OS). They were treated with 4 months of gemcitabine ±erlotinib (ﬁrst randomisation) and then randomised to
receive either two supplementary months of gemcitabine or chemoradiation [36]. The median OS showed no improvement in
the chemoradiation group (15.2 versus 16.4 months) even
though local tumour control did seem a little bit better in this
group [I, D]. Several small retrospective and prospective studies
have suggested that FOLFIRINOX may be able to obtain an interesting response rate in this population, and may have rendered
some patients with locally advanced cancers resectable. However,
it is too early to recommend this treatment and trials are ongoing.
Thus, the standard of care for these patients currently remains as
6 months of gemcitabine [I, B].

locally advanced disease
When the patient has no metastases and the tumour is not considered as borderline resectable, the tumour is deﬁned as truly
locally advanced (Table 3). Treatment of this group of patients
remains highly controversial. Regardless of the treatment strategy, the average OS for these patients remains low (<1 year) in
the oldest studies. However, in the recent LAP07 trial [36],
which included only patients with locally advanced disease,

v | Ducreux et al.

recommendations for treatment of locally advanced disease

• The standard of care is 6 months of gemcitabine [I, A]
• A minor role of chemoradiation in this subgroup of patients
has been observed [I, A]

• It is impossible to recommend any chemoradiation treatment
other than the classical combination of capecitabine and
radiotherapy [IV, C]

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

Annals of Oncology

treatment of advanced/metastatic
disease
palliative and supportive care
Before even considering systemic chemotherapy, patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer may need interventions to provide relief
of biliary and/or duodenal obstruction, malnutrition, and pain.
In the event of a biliary obstruction due to a pancreatic
tumour, the endoscopic placement of a metallic biliary stent is
strongly recommended. The endoscopic method is safer than
percutaneous insertion and is as successful as surgical hepatojejunostomy [42] [II, B].
Duodenal obstruction is preferentially managed by endoscopic placement of an expandable metal stent when possible, and is
favoured over surgery [42] [IV, B].
Pain is also considered to be a major priority in these patients
and it is observed in almost all patients with advanced pancreatic carcinoma. It must be managed aggressively following standard guidelines on pain treatment, without any major speciﬁcity
due to the location of the disease [43]. However, radiotherapy
can be used at this stage to control the coeliac pain induced by a
primary pancreatic tumour. Oral supplementation of pancreatic
enzyme has been suggested to help control pain; though this has
never been proven by a randomised study and should not be
considered as a reason to prescribe such drugs. The input of a
pain control specialist is often mandatory.
Coeliac plexus block (CPB) can lead to pain control and frequently to a decrease in the total amount of systemic drugs and
their side-effects. The endoscopic method is safer than percutaneous insertion and is as successful as surgical hepatojejunostomy [42] [II, B].
While it was classically done percutaneously, one new way to
perform CPB is represented by EUS guidance. Previous studies
have suggested a decrease in success rate when there is evidence of
disease outside the pancreas, such as coeliac or portal adenopathy.
CPB should be carried out in the presence of resistant pain and
only if the clinical condition of the patient is not poor.
recommendation for palliative and supportive care in advanced/
metastatic disease

• Duodenal obstruction is preferably managed by endoscopic
placement of an expandable metal stent when possible, and is
favoured over surgery [42] [IV, B]

oncologic treatment
Over the past two decades, the development of improved systemic
treatments has been a top priority for pancreatic cancer. In 1997,
gemcitabine monotherapy was established as the standard of care,
after being shown to offer greater clinical beneﬁt and a small survival improvement over weekly 5-FU therapy [44] [II, A]. Since
then, gemcitabine chemotherapy combinations have been intensely evaluated. Despite frequently encouraging early-phase
data, phase III trials have not given conﬁrmatory results. These
combinations have included cytotoxic agents such as irinotecan,
5-FU, cisplatin, oxaliplatin and capecitabine. Three separate
meta-analyses [45] reported a statistically signiﬁcant survival advantage of combination therapy compared with gemcitabine
alone [I, C]. Capecitabine and cisplatin-based combinations have

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

clinical practice guidelines
produced the greatest beneﬁt. However, due to the low level of
evidence, there have been no clear changes in the daily clinical
management of these patients. Even with modern agents such as
tyrosine kinase inhibitors or monoclonal antibodies against
various targets, the results of large phase III trials evaluating the
addition of these drugs to gemcitabine have been disappointing.
The targeted therapies tested have included bevacizumab, cetuximab, aﬂibercept, and anti-insulin growth factor agents. The exception is the combination of gemcitabine and the EGFR tyrosine
kinase inhibitor erlotinib, which gained regulatory approval following a 12-day improvement in median survival compared with
gemcitabine alone in a large randomised trial [46]. Arguably,
however, this duration of survival prolongation is clinically irrelevant for most patients; therefore, erlotinib has not been widely
used in this disease. The inefﬁcacy of erlotinib in locally advanced
disease which was shown in the LAP07 trial [36] is an additional
argument against the use of this drug for this indication.
Major improvements in the treatment of metastatic disease came
with the demonstration of the efﬁcacy of a 5-FU-based triplet
chemotherapy. The FOLFIRINOX regimen has proven superior to
gemcitabine alone, in terms of efﬁcacy, despite an increase in toxicity [47]. This trial included patients who were selected based on
their ability to receive this aggressive chemotherapy [Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance status 0 or 1,
and normal or subnormal serum bilirubin level]. The median OS
was 11.1 months in the FOLFIRINOX group compared with 6.8
months in the gemcitabine group [hazard ratio (HR) for death,
0.57; 95% conﬁdence interval 0.45–0.73; P < 0.001). Median PFS
and ORR were also statistically better with FOLFIRINOX than with
gemcitabine. More adverse events were noted in the FOLFIRINOX
group; 5.4% of patients in this group had febrile neutropaenia.
FOLFIRINOX is an option for the treatment of patients with metastatic pancreatic cancer and good performance status [I, A]. After
decades of failed randomised trials that have tried to add a drug to
gemcitabine alone, a recent trial has shown positive results, demonstrating that the combination of gemcitabine plus nab-paclitaxel is
better than gemcitabine alone in metastatic patients [48]. A total of
861 patients were randomly assigned to receive nab-paclitaxel plus
gemcitabine or gemcitabine alone. The median OS was 8.5 months
in the nab-paclitaxel–gemcitabine group compared with 6.7
months in the gemcitabine group (HR for death, 0.72). Both median
PFS and response rate were improved in the nab-paclitaxel–gemcitabine group compared with gemcitabine alone. In the nab-paclitaxel–gemcitabine group, neuropathy of grade 3 or higher
improved to grade 1 or lower in a median of 29 days [I, A].
There are no data concerning a direct comparison of
FOLFIRINOX and Gem-nab-paclitaxel. An indirect comparison
of the two regimens may suggest a slightly greater activity but also
higher toxicity of FOLFIRINOX. No speciﬁc data favours the use
of one regimen over the other in a deﬁned subgroup of patients.
Thus, either of these two options can be offered to patients with
serum bilirubin levels less than 1.5× upper limit of normal (ULN)
and good performance status (ECOG 0-1) [I, A].
In conclusion, it can be considered that there are three
options to treat patients with a metastatic pancreatic cancer
according to their general status:
1) For patients with performance status of 3/4, with signiﬁcant
morbidities and a very short life expectancy: only

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv295 | v

clinical practice guidelines
symptomatic treatment can be considered. Even chemotherapy with gemcitabine cannot be considered for such
patients.
2) In very selected patients with ECOG performance status 2
due to heavy tumour load, gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel
can be considered for best chance of response [II, B].
3) For patients with performance status of 2 and/or bilirubin
level higher than 1.5× ULN: monotherapy with gemcitabine
could be considered [I, A]
4) If the performance status of the patient is 0 or 1 and the bilirubin level is below 1.5× ULN two types of combination chemotherapy—the FOLFIRINOX regimen or the combination of
gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel—should be considered [I, A]
The efﬁcacy of the treatment has to be evaluated every two
months with a comparative CT scan. The treatment has to be
stopped if a RECIST progression is observed and second-line
treatment has to be discussed.

second-line treatment
A ﬁrst randomised trial (168 patients) has shown, in patients
with advanced gemcitabine-refractory pancreatic cancer, that
second-line 5-FU, folinic acid and oxaliplatin, signiﬁcantly
extend the duration of OS when compared with 5-FU, folinic
acid alone [49]. These results have not been conﬁrmed by a
more recent Canadian trial [45]. Very recently, combination of
MM-398, a nanoliposomal encapsulation of irinotecan, and 5FU, folinic acid has shown an improvement of OS (6.1 versus
4.2 months), PFS and ORR in the intent-to-treat population
over 5-FU/LV alone. Second-line therapy of pancreatic cancer
has to be considered in terms of risk beneﬁt for the patient. If
the general status remains correct, considering the conﬂicting
results on the use of oxaliplatin, MM-398 when available in all
countries may be the best option for second-line treatment of
these patients [II, B].

speciﬁc treatment of rare forms
Patients with pancreatic cancer related to BRCA1 or BRCA2
mutations have been shown to be more sensitive to platinum salt
treatment. These patients may be good candidates for
FOLFIRINOX or even 5-FU cisplatin producing more DNA
adducts [50], while trials with PARP inhibitors are ongoing in
this speciﬁc population.
Pancreatic carcinoma with acinar cells seems to have a better
prognosis. There is no speciﬁcity for the treatment of these
patients at this time; therefore, the FOLFIRINOX regimen can
be used. Pancreatic acinar cell carcinoma has recently shown recurrent RAF fusions and frequent inactivation of DNA repair
genes [51]: these could be targetable in the near future and lead
to new treatment options.
recommendations for oncological treatment of advanced/
metastatic disease

• Biliary stenting: the endoscopic method is safer than percutaneous insertion and is as successful as surgical hepatojejunostomy [II, B]
• Pain control is mandatory and frequently needs the help of a
pain specialist

v | Ducreux et al.

Annals of Oncology

• If the performance status is 3/4, with signiﬁcant morbidities
and a very short life expectancy: only symptomatic treatment
can be considered
• In very selected patients with ECOG performance status 2 due
to heavy tumour load, gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel can be
considered for best chance of response [II, B]
• If the performance status of the patient is 2 and/or the bilirubin level is higher than 1.5× ULN: a monotherapy with gemcitabine should be considered [I, A]
• If the performance status of the patient is 0 or 1 and the bilirubin level is below 1.5× ULN two types of combination chemotherapy—the FOLFIRINOX regimen or the combination of
gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel—should be considered [I, A]

personalised medicine
Among the validated drugs for pancreatic cancer, there is currently no relevant biomarker used in the medical decision
making and none should be used in clinical practice.
Emerging data from sequencing initiatives in pancreatic cancer
are unveiling a vast array of molecular aberrations and also a signiﬁcant inter- and intra-tumoral heterogeneity [52]. This introduces major challenges when trying to identify the most relevant
targeted therapy. The most frequent genes harbouring genetic
aberrations in pancreatic cancer are KRAS, TP53, CDKN2A, and
SMAD4. Among the numerous biomarkers tested in pancreatic
cancer, some deserve particular attention.
Loss of SMAD4 expression in pancreatic cancer has been associated with a poorer prognosis [53], which could be useful for
prognostic stratiﬁcation and therapeutic decision making.
BRCA2, PALB2, ATM, or mismatch repair (hMLH1 and
MSH2) gene mutations, which subsequently cause a DNA
damage repair deﬁciency, might be more sensitive to platinum
or PARP inhibitors.
Secreted protein acidic and rich in cysteine (SPARC) expression
in the peritumoural stroma has been associated with a longer OS
in patients receiving nab-paclitaxel + gemcitabine, compared with
those receiving gemcitabine alone. However, this was not conﬁrmed upon analysis of the data from the MPACT phase III trial.
STK11 acts as a tumour suppressor gene, germline mutations
of STK11 are associated with Peutz–Jeghers syndrome. In vitro
data and case reports suggest that mTOR inhibitors demonstrate
anti-tumour activity [54].
The hedgehog pathway is an early and late mediator of pancreatic cancer tumour genesis [55]. Smoothened inhibitor saridegib, which failed to provide any beneﬁt in tests on nonselected pancreatic cancer, might be of particular interest
among patients with hedgehog signalling activation. Mutations
in PTCH are known to activate hedgehog signalling in experimental models, and are detected in 2% of patients with pancreatic cancer.
The human equilibrative nucleoside transporter 1 (hENT1) is
responsible for the intracellular uptake of the prodrug gemcitabine into tumour cells. While tumour hENT1 expression is
thereby presumed to be a predictive biomarker of gemcitabine
efﬁcacy, contradictory data render its exact role unclear. In the
ESPAC-3 trial, patients with high pancreatic hENT1 expression,
treated with gemcitabine, had a longer survival compared
with those with a low expression [56]. In the phase III AIO-

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

Annals of Oncology

clinical practice guidelines

Figure 2. Treatment strategy. ChT, chemotherapy; RT, radiotherapy; 5-FU, 5-ﬂuorouracil; LV, leucovorin; PS, performance status; ULN, upper limit of normal.

PK0104 trial, a phase III trial that compared gemcitabine/erlotinib followed by capecitabine with capecitabine/erlotinib followed
by gemcitabine, no difference in OS was found with respect to
hENT1 expression [57].
In the recent whole-sequencing analysis [10], a signiﬁcant
proportion of tumours harboured focal ampliﬁcations, many of
which contained druggable oncogenes (ERBB2, MET, FGFR1,
CDK6, PIK3R3, and PIK3CA), but at low prevalence among individual patients. Genomic instability co-segregated with inactivation of DNA maintenance genes (BRCA1, BRCA2, or PALB2)
and a mutational signature of DNA damage repair deﬁciency.
Of eight patients who received platinum therapy, four of ﬁve
individuals with these measures of defective DNA maintenance
responded.

• There is no role today for personalised medicine in this

key points

summary of recommendations

• A few targetable mutations have been identiﬁed in pancreatic

An overview of recommendations related to therapy is given in
Figure 2 and Table 4.

cancer

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

cancer [IV, C]

follow-up and long-term implications
Considering the poor prognosis of the disease upon diagnosis of
a recurrence, there is no evidence that regular follow-up after
initial therapy with curative intent has any impact on the
outcome. Follow-up visits should concentrate on symptoms, nutrition, and psycho-social support.
recommendations for follow-up

• There is no evidence that regular follow-up after initial
therapy with curative intent is useful [IV, D].

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv295 | v

clinical practice guidelines
Table 4. Summary of key points and recommendations

Annals of Oncology

Incidence and epidemiology

•
•

•
•

•

5%–10% of pancreatic cancers are due to genetic alteration
The main risk factors are tobacco, and factors related to dietary habits
(BMI, red meat intake, low fruit and vegetables intake, diabetes,
alcohol intake)

Diagnosis

•
•

Early symptoms of pancreatic cancer result from a mass effect
Common presenting symptoms include jaundice, pain, weight loss,
steatorrhoea

•
•

Pathology

•
•

95% of pancreatic cancers are adenocarcinomas
Mucinous lesions of the pancreas have potential for malignant
progression

Molecular biology

•
•
•

The most frequent precursors are microscopic PanIN, followed by
IPMN and mucinous cystic neoplasm
Multiple combinations of genetic mutations are commonly found in
pancreatic cancers
Some of the recent genetic mutations discovered could become
targetable in the near future

Staging

•
•
•
•

CA 19-9 is the most useful tumour marker in pancreatic cancer [IV, B]
Staging of the patient is initially done by CT scan
EUS provides some complementary information and allows biopsy of
the tumour [II, A]
MRI should be discussed, especially in cystic lesions [IV, C]

Personalised medicine

•
•

•
•
•

A multidisciplinary team is necessary
Tumour clearance should be given for all seven margins identified by
the surgeon [IV, B]
Standard lymphadenectomy should involve the removal of ≥15 lymph
nodes to allow adequate pathologic staging of the disease [IV, A]
Adjuvant treatment is done with either gemcitabine or 5-FU folinic
acid [I, A]
No chemoradiation should be given to patients after surgery except in
clinical trials [I, E]

A few targetable mutations have been identified in pancreatic cancer
There is no role today for personalised medicine in this cancer [IV, C]

Follow-up and long-term implications

•

There is no evidence that regular follow-up after initial therapy with
curative intent is useful [IV, D]

BMI, body mass index; PanIN, pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia;
IPMN, intraductal papillary mucinous neoplasm; CT, computed
tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; MRI, magnetic resonance
imaging; 5-FU, 5-fluorouracil; ULN, upper limit of normal; ECOG,
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group.
Table 5. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation
(adapted from the Infectious Diseases Society of America-United
States Public Health Service Grading Systema)

Treatment of localised disease

•
•

Pain control is mandatory and frequently needs the help of a pain specialist
For patients with performance status of 3/4, with significant
morbidities and a very short life expectancy: only symptomatic
treatment can be considered
In very selected patients with ECOG performance status 2 due to
heavy tumour load, gemcitabine and nab-paclitaxel can be considered
for best chance of response [II, B]
For patients with performance status of 2 and/or bilirubin level higher
than 1.5× ULN: a monotherapy with gemcitabine could be considered
[I, A]
If the performance status of the patient is 0 or 1 and the bilirubin level
is below 1.5× ULN two types of combination chemotherapy—the
FOLFIRINOX regimen or the combination of gemcitabine and nabpaclitaxel—should be considered [I, A]

Levels of evidence
I

II

Treatment of non-resectable disease: borderline resectable lesions

•
•

Patients with borderline resectable lesions should be included in
clinical trials wherever possible
In routine practice, if the patient is not included in a trial, a period of
chemotherapy followed by chemoradiation and then surgery appears
to be the best option [IV, B]

III
IV
V

Grades of recommendation
A

Treatment of non-resectable disease: locally advanced disease

•
•
•

B

The standard of care is 6 months of gemcitabine [I, A]
A minor role of chemoradiation in this subgroup of patients has been
observed [I, A]
It is impossible to recommend any chemoradiation treatment other
than the classical combination of capecitabine and radiotherapy [IV, C]

C

D

Treatment of metastatic disease

•
•

Palliative and supportive care: duodenal obstruction is preferably
managed by endoscopic placement of an expandable metal stent when
possible, and is favoured over surgery [V, B]
Biliary stenting: the endoscopic method is safer than percutaneous
insertion and is as successful as surgical hepatojejunostomy [II, B]

v | Ducreux et al.

Evidence from at least one large randomised, controlled trial
of good methodological quality (low potential for bias) or
meta-analyses of well-conducted randomised trials without
heterogeneity
Small randomised trials or large randomised trials with a
suspicion of bias (lower methodological quality) or metaanalyses of such trials or of trials with demonstrated
heterogeneity
Prospective cohort studies
Retrospective cohort studies or case–control studies
Studies without control group, case reports, expert opinions

E

Strong evidence for efficacy with a substantial clinical benefit,
strongly recommended
Strong or moderate evidence for efficacy but with a limited
clinical benefit, generally recommended
Insufficient evidence for efficacy or benefit does not outweigh
the risk or the disadvantages (adverse events, costs, …),
optional
Moderate evidence against efficacy or for adverse outcome,
generally not recommended
Strong evidence against efficacy or for adverse outcome, never
recommended

a

By permission of the Infectious Diseases Society of America [58].

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

Annals of Oncology

methodology
These clinical practice guidelines were developed in accordance
with the ESMO standard operating procedures for clinical practice guidelines development. The relevant literature has been
selected by the expert authors. A summary of recommendations
is given in Table 4. Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have been applied using the system shown in Table 5.
Statements without grading were considered justiﬁed standard
clinical practice by the experts and the ESMO faculty. This
manuscript has been subjected to an anonymous peer review
process.

conﬂict of interest
MD has reported participation in advisory boards and at symposiums with Celgene. TS has reported participation to advisory
boards and at symposiums with Celgene and research funding
from Celgene. JLVL has reported participation to advisory boards
and at symposiums with Celgene and research funding from
Celgene. The other authors have reported no potential conﬂicts of
interest.

references
1. Malvezzi M, Bertuccio P, Levi F et al. European cancer mortality predictions for the
year 2014. Ann Oncol 2014; 25: 1650–1656.
2. Yeo TP. Demographics, epidemiology, and inheritance of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. Semin Oncol 2015; 42: 8–18.
3. Larsson SC, Wolk A. Red and processed meat consumption and risk of pancreatic
cancer: meta-analysis of prospective studies. Br J Cancer 2012; 106: 603–607.
4. Ojajarvi IA, Partanen TJ, Ahlbom A et al. Occupational exposures and pancreatic
cancer: a meta-analysis. Occup Environ Med 2000; 57: 316–324.
5. Maisonneuve P, Lowenfels AB. Risk factors for pancreatic cancer: a summary
review of meta-analytical studies. Int J Epidemiol 2015; 44: 186–198.
6. Rishi A, Goggins M, Wood LD, Hruban RH. Pathological and molecular evaluation
of pancreatic neoplasms. Semin Oncol 2015; 42: 28–39.
7. Wisnoski NC, Townsend CM, Jr, Nealon WH et al. 672 patients with acinar cell
carcinoma of the pancreas: a population-based comparison to pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Surgery 2008; 144: 141–148.
8. Dudeja V, Allen PJ. Premalignant cystic neoplasms of the pancreas. Semin Oncol
2015; 42: 70–85.
9. Esposito I, Konukiewitz B, Schlitter AM, Klöppel G. Pathology of pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma: facts, challenges and future developments. World J
Gastroenterol 2014; 20: 13833–13841.
10. Waddell N, Pajic M, Patch AM et al. Whole genomes redeﬁne the mutational
landscape of pancreatic cancer. Nature 2015; 518: 495–501.
11. Nawaz H, Fan CY, Kloke J et al. Performance characteristics of endoscopic
ultrasound in the staging of pancreatic cancer: a meta-analysis. JOP 2013; 14:
484–497.
12. Al-Hawary MM, Francis IR, Chari ST et al. Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
radiology reporting template: consensus statement of the Society of Abdominal
Radiology and the American Pancreatic Association. Radiology 2014; 270:
248–260.
13. Bipat S, Phoa SS, van Delden OM et al. Ultrasonography, computed tomography
and magnetic resonance imaging for diagnosis and determining resectability of
pancreatic adenocarcinoma: a meta-analysis. J Comput Assist Tomogr 2005; 29:
438–445.
14. Callery MP, Chang KJ, Fishman EK et al. Pretreatment assessment of resectable
and borderline resectable pancreatic cancer: expert consensus statement. Ann
Surg Oncol 2009; 16: 1727–1733.
15. Wong JC, Lu DS. Staging of pancreatic adenocarcinoma by imaging studies. Clin
Gastroenterol Hepatol 2008; 6: 1301–1308.

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

clinical practice guidelines
16. Ngamruengphong S, Swanson KM, Shah ND, Wallace MB. Preoperative
endoscopic ultrasound-guided ﬁne needle aspiration does not impair survival of
patients with resected pancreatic cancer. Gut 2015; 64: 1105–1110.
17. Abrams RA, Lowy AM, O’Reilly EM et al. Combined modality treatment of
resectable and borderline resectable pancreas cancer: expert consensus
statement. Ann Surg Oncol 2009; 16: 1751–1756.
18. Bockhorn M, Uzunoglu FG, Adham M et al. Borderline resectable pancreatic
cancer: a consensus statement by the International Study Group of Pancreatic
Surgery (ISGPS). Surgery 2014; 155: 977–988.
19. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Guidelines Version 2.2015
Pancreatic Adenocarcinoma. http://www.nccn.org.
20. Delpero JR, Bachellier P, Regenet N et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma: a French multicentre prospective evaluation of resection
margins in 150 evaluable specimens. HPB (Oxford) 2014; 16: 20–33.
21. Delpero JR, Boher JM, Sauvanet A et al. Pancreatic adenocarcinoma with venous
involvement: is up-front synchronous portal-superior mesenteric vein resection still
justiﬁed? A survey of the association francaise de chirurgie. Ann Surg Oncol 2015;
22: 1874–1883.
22. Mitchem JB, Hamilton N, Gao F et al. Long-term results of resection of
adenocarcinoma of the body and tail of the pancreas using radical antegrade
modular pancreatosplenectomy procedure. J Am Coll Surg 2012; 214: 46–52.
23. Kooby DA, Hawkins WG, Schmidt CM et al. A multicenter analysis of distal
pancreatectomy for adenocarcinoma: is laparoscopic resection appropriate? J Am
Coll Surg 2010; 210: 779–785.
24. Ricci C, Casadei R, Taffurelli G et al. Laparoscopic versus open distal
pancreatectomy for ductal adenocarcinoma: a systematic review and metaanalysis. J Gastrointest Surg 2015; 19: 770–781.
25. Tol JA, Gouma DJ, Bassi C et al. Deﬁnition of a standard lymphadenectomy in
surgery for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma: a consensus statement by the
International Study Group on Pancreatic Surgery (ISGPS). Surgery 2014; 156:
591–600.
26. Ragulin-Coyne E, Carroll JE, Smith JK et al. Perioperative mortality after
pancreatectomy: a risk score to aid decision-making. Surgery 2012; 152(3 Suppl.
1): S120–S127.
27. van der Gaag NA, Rauws EA, van Eijck CH et al. Preoperative biliary drainage for
cancer of the head of the pancreas. N Engl J Med 2010; 362: 129–137.
28. Neoptolemos JP, Dunn JA, Stocken DD et al. Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy and
chemotherapy in resectable pancreatic cancer: a randomised controlled trial.
Lancet 2001; 358: 1576–1585.
29. Oettle H, Post S, Neuhaus P et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with gemcitabine vs
observation in patients undergoing curative-intent resection of pancreatic cancer: a
randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2007; 297: 267–277.
30. Neoptolemos JP, Stocken DD, Bassi C et al. Adjuvant chemotherapy with
ﬂuorouracil plus folinic acid vs gemcitabine following pancreatic cancer resection:
a randomized controlled trial. JAMA 2010; 304: 1073–1081.
31. Marechal R, Bachet JB, Mackey JR et al. Levels of gemcitabine transport and
metabolism proteins predict survival times of patients treated with gemcitabine for
pancreatic adenocarcinoma. Gastroenterology 2012; 143: 664–674.
32. Assiﬁ MM, Lu X, Eibl G et al. Neoadjuvant therapy in pancreatic adenocarcinoma:
a meta-analysis of phase II trials. Surgery 2011; 150: 466–473.
33. Gillen S, Schuster T, Meyer Zum Buschenfelde C et al. Preoperative/neoadjuvant
therapy in pancreatic cancer: a systematic review and meta-analysis of response
and resection percentages. PLoS Med 2010; 7: e1000267.
34. Denost Q, Laurent C, Adam JP et al. Pancreaticoduodenectomy following
chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced adenocarcinoma of the pancreatic head.
HPB (Oxford) 2013; 15: 716–723.
35. Landry J, Catalano PJ, Staley C et al. Randomized phase II study of gemcitabine
plus radiotherapy versus gemcitabine, 5-ﬂuorouracil, and cisplatin followed by
radiotherapy and 5-ﬂuorouracil for patients with locally advanced, potentially
resectable pancreatic adenocarcinoma. J Surg Oncol 2010; 101: 587–592.
36. Hammel P, Huguet F, Van Laethem J-L et al. Comparison of chemoradiotherapy
(CRT) and chemotherapy (CT) in patients with a locally advanced pancreatic cancer
(LAPC) controlled after 4 months of gemcitabine with or without erlotinib: Final
results of the international phase III LAP 07 study. J Clin Oncol 2013;31(suppl):
abstr LBA4003.

doi:10.1093/annonc/mdv295 | v

clinical practice guidelines
37. Shinchi H, Takao S, Noma H et al. Length and quality of survival after externalbeam radiotherapy with concurrent continuous 5-ﬂuorouracil infusion for
locally unresectable pancreatic cancer. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys 2002; 53:
146–150.
38. Sultana A, Tudur Smith C, Cunningham D et al. Systematic review, including metaanalyses, on the management of locally advanced pancreatic cancer using
radiation/combined modality therapy. Br J Cancer 2007; 96: 1183–1190.
39. Chauffert B, Mornex F, Bonnetain F et al. Phase III trial comparing initial
chemoradiotherapy (intermittent cisplatin and infusional 5-FU) followed by
gemcitabine vs. gemcitabine alone in patients with locally advanced nonmetastatic pancreatic cancer: a FFCD-SFRO study. J Clin Oncol 2006; 24(suppl):
abstr 4008.
40. Loehrer PJ, Sr, Feng Y, Cardenes H et al. Gemcitabine alone versus gemcitabine
plus radiotherapy in patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer: an Eastern
Cooperative Oncology Group trial. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29: 4105–4112.
41. Mukherjee S, Hurt CN, Bridgewater J et al. Gemcitabine-based or capecitabinebased chemoradiotherapy for locally advanced pancreatic cancer (SCALOP): a
multicentre, randomised, phase 2 trial. Lancet Oncol 2013; 14: 317–326.
42. Stark A, Hines OJ. Endoscopic and operative palliation strategies for pancreatic
ductal adenocarcinoma. Semin Oncol 2015; 42: 163–176.
43. Ripamonti CI, Santini D, Maranzano E et al. Management of cancer pain: ESMO
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol 2012; 23(Suppl 7): vii139–vii154.
44. Burris HA, III, Moore MJ, Andersen J et al. Improvements in survival and clinical
beneﬁt with gemcitabine as ﬁrst-line therapy for patients with advanced pancreas
cancer: a randomized trial. J Clin Oncol 1997; 15: 2403–2413.
45. Ciliberto D, Botta C, Correale P et al. Role of gemcitabine-based combination
therapy in the management of advanced pancreatic cancer: a meta-analysis of
randomised trials. Eur J Cancer 2013; 49: 593–603.
46. Moore MJ, Goldstein D, Hamm J et al. Erlotinib plus gemcitabine compared with
gemcitabine alone in patients with advanced pancreatic cancer: a phase III trial of
the National Cancer Institute of Canada Clinical Trials Group. J Clin Oncol 2007;
25: 1960–1966.

v | Ducreux et al.

Annals of Oncology
47. Conroy T, Desseigne F, Ychou M et al. FOLFIRINOX versus gemcitabine for
metastatic pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med 2011; 364: 1817–1825.
48. Von Hoff DD, Goldstein D, Renschler MF. Albumin-bound paclitaxel plus
gemcitabine in pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med 2014; 370: 479–480.
49. Oettle H, Riess H, Stieler JM et al. Second-line oxaliplatin, folinic acid, and ﬂuorouracil
versus folinic acid and ﬂuorouracil alone for gemcitabine-refractory pancreatic cancer:
outcomes from the CONKO-003 trial. J Clin Oncol 2014; 32: 2423–2429.
50. Sonnenblick A, Kadouri L, Appelbaum L et al. Complete remission, in BRCA2
mutation carrier with metastatic pancreatic adenocarcinoma, treated with cisplatin
based therapy. Cancer Biol Ther 2011; 12: 165–168.
51. Chmielecki J, Hutchinson KE, Frampton GM et al. Comprehensive genomic
proﬁling of pancreatic acinar cell carcinomas identiﬁes recurrent RAF fusions and
frequent inactivation of DNA repair genes. Cancer Discov 2014; 4: 1398–1405.
52. Yachida S, Jones S, Bozic I et al. Distant metastasis occurs late during the genetic
evolution of pancreatic cancer. Nature 2010; 467: 1114–1117.
53. Blackford A, Serrano OK, Wolfgang CL et al. SMAD4 gene mutations are
associated with poor prognosis in pancreatic cancer. Clin Cancer Res 2009; 15:
4674–4679.
54. Klumpen HJ, Queiroz KC, Spek CA et al. mTOR inhibitor treatment of pancreatic
cancer in a patient with Peutz-Jeghers syndrome. J Clin Oncol 2011; 29:
e150–e153.
55. Hidalgo M, Maitra A. The hedgehog pathway and pancreatic cancer. N Engl J Med
2009; 361: 2094–2096.
56. Greenhalf W, Ghaneh P, Neoptolemos JP et al. Pancreatic cancer hENT1
expression and survival from gemcitabine in patients from the ESPAC-3 trial. J Natl
Cancer Inst 2014; 106: djt347.
57. Ormanns S, Siveke JT, Heinemann V et al. pERK, pAKT and p53 as tissue
biomarkers in erlotinib-treated patients with advanced pancreatic cancer: a
translational subgroup analysis from AIO-PK0104. BMC Cancer 2014; 14: 624.
58. Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections
among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin Infect Dis 2001; 33:
139–144.

Volume 26 | Supplement 5 | September 2015

