SPECIAL ARTICLE

Gastric cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis, treatment
and follow-up5
F. Lordick1, F. Carneiro2,3,4, S. Cascinu5, T. Fleitas6, K. Haustermans7, G. Piessen8,9,10,11, A. Vogel12 & E. C. Smyth13, on behalf
of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1
Department of Medicine II (Oncology, Gastroenterology, Hepatology, Pulmonology and Infectious Diseases), University Cancer Center Leipzig (UCCL), University
Medical Center, Leipzig, Germany; 2Department of Pathology, Centro Hospitalar Universitário de São João (CHUSJ), Porto; 3Faculty of Medicine, University of Porto
(FMUP), Porto; 4Instituto de Investigação e Inovação em Saúde (i3S)/Institute of Molecular Pathology and Immunology, University of Porto (Ipatimup), Porto, Portugal;
5
Department of Medical Oncology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Università Vita-Salute, IRCCS Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy; 6Department of Medical Oncology,
INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute, University of Valencia, Valencia, Spain; 7Department of Radiation Oncology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium;
8
University of Lille, UMR9020-U1277 - CANTHER - Cancer Heterogeneity Plasticity and Resistance to Therapies, Lille; 9CNRS, UMR9020, Lille; 10Inserm, U1277, Lille;
11
CHU Lille, Department of Digestive and Oncological Surgery, Lille, France; 12Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Hannover, Germany; 13Department of Oncology, Cambridge University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK

Available online 29 July 2022

Key words: diagnosis, epidemiology, ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline, follow-up, gastric cancer, treatment

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
More than 1 million (1 089 103) new cases of gastric cancer
were estimated globally in 2020, resulting in 768 793 deaths.1
These burden estimates will continue to increase due to the
ageing population and growth of high-risk groups. Of these
global numbers, an estimated 136 038 cases and 96 997
deaths occurred in Europe.1 Gastric cancer displays substantial global variation in incidence; the highest rates are
observed in Eastern Asia, Central and Eastern Europe and
South America.1 A gradual decline in the incidence of gastric
cancer has been observed in Western Europe and North
America over the past 60 years, and more recent declines in
high-risk countries have also become apparent.2 This is
epidemiologically distinct from the relative increase in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma, including tumours of the
oesophagogastric junction (OGJ), which are discussed in a
separate guideline document.
Incidence in men is twice as high as in women. Risk
factors vary by anatomical subsite of disease; non-cardia
gastric cancer, which is more common in East Asia and
Latin America, represents w80% of gastric tumours globally
and has been associated with Helicobacter pylori (H. pylori)
infection, alcohol use, high salt intake and low consumption

*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via
Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5
Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: September 2016, last
update July 2022. This publication supersedes the previously published versiondAnn Oncol 2016;27(suppl 5):v38-v49.
0923-7534/© 2022 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

of fruit and vegetables. Proximal (cardia) gastric cancer is
associated with obesity and gastro-oesophageal reﬂux and
is more common in North America and Western Europe.3
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive gastric cancer is more
prevalent in the fundus or body (62%) and its prevalence
seems to be similar in Asia, Europe and the Americas.4
Recent studies report an increase in non-cardia gastric
cancer among young individuals (<50 years), especially in
low-incidence countries such as the UK and US e populations with a low prevalence of H. pylori infection. Dysbiosis of the gastric microbiome associated with modern
lifestyles and an increase in autoimmune disorders in this
age group have been postulated as potential explanations.5
Genetic predisposition
Gastric cancer demonstrates familial aggregation in w10%
of cases, and an inherited genetic predisposition is identiﬁed in up to 3% of cases.6 Genetic tumour risk syndromes
are characterised by an increased risk of early-onset cancers
in a familial context. High cancer risk is mostly driven by
loss-of-function variants in a single cancer-associated gene.
CDH1 and CTNNA1 germline variants predispose to hereditary diffuse gastric cancer (HDGC), while APC promoter 1B
single nucleotide variants predispose to gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal polyposis of the stomach (GAPPS).
Familial intestinal gastric cancer (FIGC), recognised as a
gastric cancer-predisposing disease, remains understudied
and genetically unsolved.7 Gastric cancer can also occur
within the spectrum of other genetic tumour risk syndromes, such as Lynch syndrome, familial adenomatous
polyposis (FAP), LieFraumeni and PeutzeJeghers
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1005

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

syndromes (Table 1).6 HDGC is the most studied hereditary
gastric cancer risk syndrome and is estimated to have a
population incidence rate of w5-10/100 000 births.8 The
incidence rates for other gastric cancer risk syndromes are
less well deﬁned. HDGC is an autosomal dominant cancer
syndrome that is characterised by a high prevalence of
diffuse gastric cancer and lobular breast cancer. HDGC is
caused by CDH1/E-cadherin germline single nucleotide
variants and copy number variants, classiﬁed as pathogenic
or likely pathogenic according to the American College of
Medical Genetics and Genomics and the Association for
Molecular Pathology CDH1 variant curation guidelines.9
Pathogenic variants in CTNNA1 occur in a minority of
families with HDGC. The International Gastric Cancer Linkage Consortium provides updated practice guidelines for
HDGC, recognising the emerging evidence of variability in
gastric cancer risk between families, the growing capability
of endoscopic and histological surveillance in HDGC and
greater experience managing long-term sequelae following
total gastrectomy in young patients.8

Prevention
There is consistent evidence that eradication of H. pylori
substantially reduces the incidence of gastric cancer in
healthy individuals, patients with gastric atrophy and people with a family history of gastric cancer.10,11 Non-cardia
intestinal-type cancerdthe most common histological
subtype of gastric cancerdfollows a pattern of stepwise
progression (known as the Correa Cascade) from normal
mucosa to non-atrophic gastritis, atrophic gastritis with or
without intestinal metaplasia (IM), dysplasia and ﬁnally
cancer.12 In high-risk East Asian countries (China, Japan and
South Korea), population- and endoscopy-based screening
programmes have been implemented.13-15 These programmes have resulted in higher detection rates of earlystage gastric cancer, with substantially reduced mortality.
In contrast, population-based endoscopic screening of
asymptomatic individuals is not recommended in low incidence countries.16,17 Since individuals with IM have an
increased risk of gastric cancer, multidisciplinary European
and UK endoscopy guidelines recommend that patients
with IM as well as a family history of gastric cancer,
incomplete-type IM or persistent H. pylori-associated

Table 1. Gene mutations associated with inherited predisposition to
gastric cancer6
Gene mutation

Associated syndrome

APC
APC promoter 1B
CDH1, CTNNA1
MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, PMS2
SMAD4, BMPR1A
STK11
TP53

FAP
GAPPS
HDGC
Lynch syndrome
Juvenile polyposis syndrome
PeutzeJeghers syndrome
LieFraumeni syndrome

FAP, familial adenomatous polyposis; GAPPS, gastric adenocarcinoma and proximal
polyposis of the stomach; HDGC, hereditary diffuse gastric cancer.
Adapted with permission.6

1006

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

gastritis should undergo endoscopic surveillance with
guided biopsies every 3 years.
Recommendations
 If a familial cancer syndrome is suspected, referral to a
geneticist for assessment is recommended [V, A].
 Population-based endoscopic screening of asymptomatic
individuals is only recommended in regions with a very
high incidence of gastric cancer [V, B].

DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
Diagnosis
Gastric cancer is often asymptomatic in the early stages. In
advanced disease, common signs and symptoms include
dysphagia, asthenia, indigestion, vomiting, weight loss,
early satiety and/or iron deﬁciency anaemia. In many cases,
however, these non-speciﬁc symptoms do not lead to
urgent investigations. Overall, w60% of people with gastric
cancer are not eligible for curative treatment owing to late
presentation or comorbidities.18
Endoscopic examination and forceps biopsies are the gold
standard method for diagnosing gastric cancer. Multiple (58) biopsies should be carried out to provide adequately
sized material for histological and molecular interpretation,
especially in the setting of ulcerated lesions.19,20 Details of
the mucosal surface can be evaluated by narrow-band
imaging or chromoendoscopy in combination with magnifying endoscopy. Endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) is also a
helpful tool to identify inﬁltrated regions of the gastric
wall.21 Endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and endoscopic
submucosal dissection (ESD) may also be used for diagnosis.
Both procedures can deliver reliable staging information
and can also be used to treat superﬁcial lesions such as
dysplasia or intramucosal carcinoma.22
Pathology
Approximately 90% of gastric cancers are adenocarcinomas
(ACs). This Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) does not apply
to rarer gastric malignancies such as gastrointestinal stromal
tumours, lymphomas and neuroendocrine tumours.
Based on macroscopic features, early gastric carcinomas
are sub-classiﬁed into three main types according to the
Endoscopic Classiﬁcation Review Group (Paris classiﬁcation): 0-I (protruded); 0-II (superﬁcial); and 0-III (excavated).23 Locally advanced gastric carcinomas are
macroscopically sub-classiﬁed according to the Borrmann
classiﬁcation as polypoid/fungating without ulceration (type
I), ulcerated with elevated borders and sharp margins (type
II), ulcerated with diffuse inﬁltration at the base (type III)
and diffusely inﬁltrative with thickening of the wall (type
IV).24
There are several gastric cancer histopathological classiﬁcation schemes. The most commonly used are the World
Health Organization (WHO)25 and Japanese Gastric Cancer
Association26 classiﬁcations, which are very similar, as well
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

as those proposed by Nakamura and colleagues27 and
Laurén, the latter of which recognises three main subtypes:
intestinal, diffuse and mixed.28 The WHO classiﬁcation is
widely used in Western countries and recognises ﬁve main
histological subtypes: tubular, papillary, poorly cohesive
(including signet ring cell and other subtypes), mucinous
and mixed ACs.
Molecular biology
The recently identiﬁed molecular proﬁles of gastric cancer
are important for better understanding gastric cancer subtypes and may also be useful for identifying clinically relevant biomarkers and new therapeutic targets. Intratumoural
and intertumoural heterogeneity is a feature of gastric
carcinoma which leads to diagnostic and therapeutic
challenges.
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) research network
identiﬁed four molecularly distinct gastric cancer subtypes:
EBV positive, microsatellite instability-high (MSI-H),
genomically stable (GS) and tumours with chromosomal
instability (CIN).4 Each subtype is enriched for selected
molecular abnormalities, with some overlap. The CIN subtype is enriched for copy number changes in key receptor
tyrosine kinase oncogenes such as human epidermal growth
factor receptor 2 (HER2), epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), ﬁbroblast growth factor receptor 2 (FGFR2) and
MET. Other genomic classiﬁcations, such as the Asian Cancer Research Group subtyping, show some overlap with
TCGA classiﬁcation.29
Based on positive phase III trial data, HER2 status and
programmed death-ligand 1 (PD-L1) combined positive
score (CPS) should be evaluated in patients with metastatic
gastric cancer to tailor ﬁrst-line treatment in combination
with chemotherapy (ChT) [see the table of ESMO Scale for
Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets (ESCAT) scores for
further details, Supplementary Table S1, available at
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004].30,31
Patients with HER2-overexpressing gastric cancer [HER2
immunohistochemistry (IHC) score 3þ or HER2 IHC 2þ and
FISH positive] beneﬁt from treatment with the anti-HER2
antibody trastuzumab in addition to standard platinume
ﬂuoropyrimidine ChT.30,32 The prevalence of HER2 overexpression is 10%-20%, with higher prevalence in proximal/
OGJ cancers and in the intestinal subtype according to
Laurén.30,32,33 Efﬁcacy of HER2-targeted treatment is
hampered by the intratumoural heterogeneity of HER2
expression. Therefore, quantitative reporting of the proportion of tumour cells staining positive for HER2 by IHC
and the gene ampliﬁcation ratio (if in situ hybridisation was
carried out, especially in IHC 2þ patients) have been
suggested.33
Emerging data from clinical trials suggest that immunotherapies such as programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1)
inhibitors demonstrate efﬁcacy in gastric cancer. Evaluation
of PD-L1 expression in patients with gastric cancer using
CPS has been proposed, where a cut-off 1 would indicate
positive PD-L1 expression; the prevalence of PD-L1 CPS 1
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

tumours is between 50% and 60%.34,35 A CPS cut-off 5
represents a validated threshold for overall survival (OS)
beneﬁt of nivolumab given in addition to standard
platinumeﬂuoropyrimidine ﬁrst-line ChT.31 Different antibodies for staining of PD-L1 in gastric cancer are used. In a
recent study, PD-L1 22C3 and 28-8 pharmDx assays, both
tested on the same platform (hardware), were highly
comparable at CPS cut-offs of 1, 10 and 50, providing evidence for the potential interchangeability of the two PD-L1
assays in gastric cancer.36 These results, however, were not
conﬁrmed in another study, which suggested that scoring
PD-L1 CPS with the 28-8 assay may result in higher PD-L1
scores and a higher proportion of PD-L1 positivity
compared with the 22C3 and other assays. Until stronger
evidence of inter-assay concordance is found, caution
should be taken when treating the assays as equivalent.37
MSI-H/mismatch repair deﬁciency (dMMR) are associated with better prognosis in localised stages of gastric
cancer.38 There is an ongoing debate on whether microsatellite instability (MSI)/mismatch repair (MMR) status
should be used in order to tailor peri-operative ChT.39,40 As
MSI-H/dMMR are associated with a high response rate and
improved beneﬁt from immunotherapy compared with ChT
in stage IV gastric cancer,41 MSI/MMR status should be
assessed for patients with locally advanced and unresectable or metastatic gastric cancer to tailor treatment
accordingly.32
Other molecular markers, such as FGFR2 ampliﬁcation/
overexpression, MET ampliﬁcation, claudin-18.2 overexpression and EBV,32 are being investigated and their
validation as predictive biomarkers in randomised
controlled trials (RCTs) is awaited.
Recommendations
 Diagnosis should be made from multiple (5-8) endoscopic biopsies to guarantee an adequate representation
of the tumour [IV, B].
 The histological diagnosis should be reported according
to WHO criteria [V, B].
 HER2 expression by IHC and/or ampliﬁcation by in situ
hybridisation [I, A; ESCAT score: I-A], PD-L1 by IHC according to CPS [I, A] and MSI-H/dMMR [II, A; ESCAT
score: I-B] are validated predictive biomarkers for drug
therapy.

STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
Careful tumour staging is essential to ensure patients are
appropriately selected for treatment interventions. The
recommended initial staging investigations are detailed in
Table 2.
The following characteristics are frequently demonstrated in malignant lymph nodes detected on computed
tomography (CT)42:
 Short axis diameter 6-8 mm in perigastric lymph nodes
 Round shape
 Central necrosis
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1007

Annals of Oncology
 Loss of the fatty hilum
 Heterogeneous or high enhancement
Nevertheless, the sensitivity of CT for lymph node staging
is variable (62.5%-91.9% on systematic review42) and global
consensus is lacking on speciﬁc diagnostic criteria.
EUS is more sensitive for N staging compared with CT (91%
versus 77%, respectively). Additionally, for T1 staging, the
sensitivity for EUS (82%) is higher than that for multidetector
CT (41%); however, both EUS and CT show limited speciﬁcity
(49% and 63%, respectively).43 [18F]2-Fluoro-2-deoxy-Dglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET)eCT
imaging may improve staging by detecting involved lymph
nodes or metastatic disease; however, FDGePET may not be
informative in patients with mucinous or diffuse tumours due
to lower tracer uptake.44 Therefore, FDGePETeCT is not
routinely recommended for staging of gastric cancer.
Laparoscopy and peritoneal washings for malignant cells
are recommended in all stage IB-III gastric cancers which are
considered potentially resectable, to exclude radiologically
and macroscopically occult peritoneal metastatic disease.
The beneﬁt is greater for patients with T3/T4 disease and
poorly cohesive tumours.44 The accuracy for detection of
peritoneal metastases is good, with overall sensitivity of
84.6% and speciﬁcity of 100%.45 Peritoneal metastases
should be documented according to the Peritoneal Carcinomatosis Index (PCI).46 A lower PCI score has been associated with better prognosis, and patients with limited
peritoneal metastases might be appropriate candidates for
cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal ChT
(HIPEC); however, evidence is still limited and risks must be
balanced carefully against uncertain beneﬁts.47-49 The
prognosis of patients with positive lavage cytology (CYþ)
without gross peritoneal dissemination is poor. The survival

F. Lordick et al.

beneﬁt of gastrectomy for these patients has not been
established.50,51 A retrospective analysis, however, indicated a better prognosis if CYþ can be converted to
negative lavage cytology during neoadjuvant ChT.52 The
additional value of HIPEC needs to be established in
ongoing clinical trials. Cases involving CYþ should be discussed in a multidisciplinary tumour board, weighing up the
risks and potential beneﬁt of surgery. Patients with CYþ
peritoneal lavage should ideally be treated within a clinical
trial.
Gastric cancer should be staged according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC)/Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) TNM (tumourenodee
metastasis) 8th edition staging manual (see Supplementary
Tables S2 and S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
annonc.2022.07.004).53,54
Patients should be tested for dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase enzyme deﬁciency before starting cancer treatment with 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) given by infusion, or with
the related medicines capecitabine and tegafur.55
Recommendations
 Initial staging and risk assessment should include physical examination, full and differential blood count, liver
and renal function tests, endoscopy and contrastenhanced CT scan of the thorax, abdomen  pelvis
(Table 2) [V, A].
 FDGePETeCT is not routinely recommended [III, C].
 Diagnostic laparoscopy and peritoneal washings for
cytology are recommended for patients with resectable
gastric cancer who are also candidates for perioperative ChT [III, B]. Patients with CYþ are uncertain
candidates for curatively-intended surgical resection.
 The TNM stage should be recorded according to the 8th
edition of the AJCC/UICC staging manual [IV, A].

Table 2. Diagnostic and staging investigations in gastric cancer.

MANAGEMENT OF LOCAL AND LOCOREGIONAL DISEASE
Procedure

Purpose

FBC
Renal and liver function

Assess for iron deﬁciency anaemia
Assess renal and liver function to determine
appropriate therapeutic options
Endoscopy and biopsy
Obtain tissue for diagnosis, histological
classiﬁcation and molecular biomarkers,
e.g. HER2 status
CT of thorax þ abdomen Staging of tumour e to detect local/distant
 pelvis
lymphadenopathy and metastatic disease or
ascites
EUS
Accurate assessment of T and N stage in
potentially operable tumours
Determine the proximal and distal extent of
tumour
Laparoscopy þ washings Exclude occult metastatic disease involving
peritoneum/diaphragm
PET, if available
May improve detection of occult metastatic
disease in some cases. Often negative in diffusetype gastric cancer
Assessment of nutritional May detect relevant dietary and nutritional
status
deﬁciencies in both localised and advanced
disease settings
CT, computed tomography; EUS, endoscopic ultrasound; FBC, full blood count; HER2,
human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; N, node; PET, positron emission tomography; T, tumour.

1008

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

Multidisciplinary treatment planning before any treatment
decision is mandatory. The core membership of the multidisciplinary team should include surgeons, medical and
radiation oncologists, gastroenterologists, radiologists and
pathologists, with dieticians and nurse specialists if available.18 A proposed algorithm for the treatment of localised
gastric cancer is shown in Figure 1.
Resection
Surgical resection of operable gastric cancer is potentially
curative; however, most patients relapse following resection; therefore, combined modality therapies are standard
for stage IB disease.
Endoscopic resection. Endoscopic resection is recommended for very early gastric cancers (T1a) if they are clearly
(i) conﬁned to the mucosa, (ii) well-differentiated G1-2, (iii)
2 cm and (iv) non-ulcerated.56 Expanded endoscopic
resection criteria concerning size, depth of submucosal
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

Figure 1. Treatment algorithm for localised gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
ChT, chemotherapy; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; R1, microscopic tumour at the margin; RT, radiotherapy.
a
Endoscopic resection indicated if: (i) conﬁned to mucosa; (ii) well-differentiated G1-2; (iii) 2 cm; (iv) non-ulcerated. Endoscopic resection to be considered if no more
than two expanded criteria are met according to Pimentel-Nunes et al.56
b
Lymph node dissection for T1 tumours may be conﬁned to perigastric lymph nodes and include local N2 nodes (D1þ lymphadenectomy, with variation in nodal groups
dissected according to site of cancer).
c
A triplet ChT regimen including a ﬂuoropyrimidine, a platinum compound and docetaxel should be given when possible. Recommended treatment duration is 2-3
months pre- and post-operatively.
d
Subtotal gastrectomy may be carried out if a macroscopic proximal margin of 3 cm can be achieved. For cancers of the poorly cohesive/diffuse subtype, a margin of
5 cm is advocated.
e
For patients with stage IB gastric cancer who have undergone surgery without administration of preoperative ChT. However, a peri-operative approach is preferred as
adjuvant ChT is less well tolerated than neoadjuvant ChT and neoadjuvant therapy leads to tumour downsizing, allowing for more curative resections.
f
A doublet ChT for a total duration of 6 months containing a ﬂuoropyrimidine plus oxaliplatin or docetaxel is recommended.
g
For patients with an R1 resection, adjuvant RT or ChT might be considered as an individual recommendation but is not standard.
h
For patients with MSI-H gastric cancers who have undergone surgery, adjuvant ChT cannot be recommended.

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1009

Annals of Oncology
invasion and grade of differentiation [G1/G2-no ulceration,
any diameter; G1/G2-ulceration, diameter 30 mm; G3-no
ulceration, diameter 20 mm; SM1 tumours (<500 mm)]
have been published and endoscopic resection might be
considered for early gastric cancers with fewer than two
expanded criteria.57 As some of the criteria (grading, invasion
of the submucosa) require an exact histopathological
workup, endoscopic resection can primarily be carried out for
diagnostic purposes and a resection with no tumour at the
margin (R0) should be aimed for. Two forms of endoscopic
resection are used in clinical practice: EMR is acceptable for
lesions smaller than 10-15 mm with a very low probability of
advanced histology (Paris 0-IIa)23; however, the European
Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) recommends
ESD as the treatment of choice for most gastric superﬁcial
neoplastic lesions.56
Endoscopic resection of early gastric cancer should be
carried out en bloc and allow for a complete histological
evaluation of the lateral and basal resection margins.
Surgery. The extent of surgical resection depends on
tumour location, TNM category and histological subtype.
T1 tumours which do not meet the criteria for endoscopic
resection require surgery, although less extensive surgery
than other gastric cancers. Lymph node dissection for T1
tumours may be conﬁned to perigastric lymph nodes and
include local N2 nodes (D1þ lymphadenectomy, with variation in nodal groups dissected according to the site of
cancer).
For stage IB-III disease, radical gastrectomy is indicated. A
proximal margin of 3 cm is recommended for tumours
with an expansive growth pattern (including intestinal histotypes) and 5 cm for those with an inﬁltrative growth
pattern (including poorly cohesive/diffuse histotypes).
When these rules cannot be satisﬁed, it is advisable to
examine the whole thickness of proximal resection margin
by frozen section. Subtotal gastrectomy can be selected
when a satisfactory proximal resection margin can be
obtained.58-60
The extent of nodal dissection accompanying radical
gastrectomy has been extensively debated. D1 resection
implies removal of the perigastric lymph nodes plus those
along the left gastric artery. D1þ and D2 implies removal of
additional lymph nodes along the proper or common
hepatic artery, splenic artery or coeliac axis.60 The current
AJCC/UICC TNM (8th edition) classiﬁcation recommends
excision of a minimum of 15 lymph nodes for reliable
staging.53,54 In Asian countries, observational and randomised trials have demonstrated that D2 resection leads to
superior outcomes compared with D1 resection.60 In
Western countries, patients with resectable disease should
undergo D2 resection in specialised, high-volume centres
with appropriate surgical expertise and post-operative
care.18 The Association of Upper Gastrointestinal Surgeons
of Great Britain and Ireland has stated that an ideal oesophagogastric unit would consist of four to six surgeons each
carrying out a minimum of 15-20 oesophagogastric
resections per year, serving a population of 1-2 million. The
1010

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

F. Lordick et al.

German Cancer Society requires 30 gastric resections per
year by two dedicated surgeons to qualify for certiﬁcation
as a gastric cancer centre.18 The concept of ‘enhanced
recovery’ encompasses all aspects of optimal peri-operative
care for patients undergoing gastrectomy; guidance is provided by relevant Enhanced Recovery After Surgery® Society
guidelines on this topic.61
Laparoscopic surgery has the potential beneﬁts of
decreased post-operative morbidity and reduced recovery
time, with a lymph node yield comparable with open surgery.62 Trials from East Asia in early and advanced (T2-T4a)
gastric cancer have shown that laparoscopic distal gastrectomy is non-inferior with regard to oncological outcomes,
with improved short-term outcomes. In Western countries,
two small, randomised trials reported similar short-term
outcomes between open versus laparoscopic gastrectomies, with non-inferior results regarding relapse-free
survival. Today, laparotomy is an acceptable approach to
achieve total or partial gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy for gastric cancer. A laparoscopic approach may be
selectively proposed in expert hands. Robot-assisted gastrectomy has shown similar oncological outcomes in terms
of survival and lymph node yield compared with conventional laparoscopic gastrectomy. With technical advances,
future gastric cancer surgery will most likely become
increasingly minimally invasive and will probably take
advantage of the rapidly developing robotic technologies.32
Peri-operative ChT
The UK-based phase III MAGIC trial demonstrated an
improvement in 5-year survival from 23% to 36% [hazard
ratio (HR) for death 0.75; 95% conﬁdence interval (CI) 0.600.93; P ¼ 0.009] in patients with resectable stage II and III
gastric cancer treated with six cycles (three pre- and
three post-operative) of epirubicinecisplatine5-FU (ECF)
compared with surgery alone.63 These data are supported
by a similarly designed but smaller French phase III trial that
evaluated a regimen of peri-operative cisplatine5-FU, suggesting that anthracyclines may not be needed for optimal
results.64 Peri-operative ChT has therefore been adopted as
the standard of care in Europe and many Western countries.
A German phase II-III study investigating eight cycles
of peri-operative 5-FUeleucovorineoxaliplatinedocetaxel
(FLOT) versus six cycles ECF/epirubicinecisplatinecapecitabine (ECX) reported a signiﬁcant improvement in the primary endpoint of OS (median 50 months with FLOT versus
35 months with ECF/ECX; HR 0.77; 95% CI 0.63-0.94; P ¼
0.012), with no major concerns for toxicity.65 Based on
these data, the peri-operative use of FLOT (four cycles preand four cycles post-operative) should be regarded as
standard of care for patients who are able to tolerate a
triple cytotoxic drug regimen. For patients unﬁt for triplet
ChT, a combination of a ﬂuoropyrimidine with cisplatin or
oxaliplatin is recommended.
In all relevant trials, the post-operative ChT regimen was
the same as the preoperative regimen. Whether a different
treatment regimen should be used after poor response to
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

neoadjuvant ChT is currently unknown. Also, the potential
beneﬁt of additional preoperative radiotherapy (RT) to perioperative ChT is currently undeﬁned and is being explored
in clinical trials.
Adjuvant treatment
Adjuvant ChT. Historically, a greater beneﬁt has been noted
with adjuvant ChT in Asian studies, and uptake of adjuvant
ChT in Europe for patients with resected gastric cancer remains limited due to a perceived lack of beneﬁt and routine
use of peri-operative ChT. Nevertheless, a large individual
patient-level meta-analysis of adjuvant ChT in gastric cancer
has conﬁrmed a 6% absolute beneﬁt in 5-year OS for 5-FUbased ChT compared with surgery alone (HR 0.82; 95% CI
0.76-0.90; P < 0.001) in all subgroups tested, including the
group of Western patients.66 A doublet ChT for a total
duration of 6 months containing a ﬂuoropyrimidine plus
oxaliplatin or docetaxel is recommended. It is notable,
however, that adjuvant ChT is less well tolerated than
neoadjuvant ChT and neoadjuvant therapy leads to tumour
downsizing, allowing for more curative resections; therefore, a peri-operative approach is preferred, if possible, so
that more patients can beneﬁt from systemic treatment
even if the post-operative component of treatment is
unable to be delivered.
Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy. Recently, the randomised
phase III CRITICS trial concluded that patients undergoing
ChT followed by surgery with curative intent have similar OS
and progression-free survival (PFS), regardless of whether
they receive ChT or chemoradiotherapy (CRT) after surgery.67,68 Additionally, the Korean ARTIST and ARTIST II
studies did not demonstrate a survival beneﬁt for the
addition of RT to adjuvant ChT in patients who had undergone gastrectomy with D2 lymphadenectomy.69-71
Therefore, in patients who receive adequate surgery and
have a high risk of relapse (e.g. positive nodal status), only
adjuvant ChT should be given. The addition of postoperative CRT is not recommended following R0 resection, whereas for patients who have not received preoperative ChT and have not undergone an appropriate D2
lymphadenectomy, adjuvant CRT can be considered.72,73 In
current post-operative CRT regimens, RT should preferably
be given as a concomitant regimen of ﬂuoropyrimidinebased CRT to a total dose of 45 Gy in 25 fractions of 1.8
Gy (ﬁve fractions per week) by intensity-modulated RT
techniques.
In patients who have undergone gastrectomy with
involved margins and are not candidates for more extended
surgery, post-operative RT or CRT should be discussed by a
multidisciplinary tumour board. Post-operative performance status, comorbidities and additional tumour risk
factors, including nodal status, should be considered for
decision making. A retrospective Dutch registry study suggested that adjuvant CRT was associated with a marginal
improvement in survival compared with no further treatment in patients who had undergone a resection with
microscopic tumour at the margin (R1).74 As in the case of
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

R0 resections, tumour recurrence after R1 resections is
mainly systemic rather than local. The potential beneﬁt of
additive local post-operative therapies in R1-resected
patients must be balanced against overall prognosis and
therapy-speciﬁc morbidity and mortality. In conclusion, no
speciﬁc and evidence-based recommendation can be made
for patients with R1-resected gastric cancer.
MSI. Patients with MSI-H gastric cancers who have undergone radical resection have a better prognosis compared
with patients with non-MSI-H subtypes of gastric cancer.
There seems to be no added beneﬁt of adjuvant ChT in this
population, according to retrospective analyses of prospectively conducted RCTs.38 Although evidence is limited,
adjuvant (post-operative) ChT should be avoided in resected
MSI-H gastric cancers.38 Regarding peri-operative treatment
of MSI-H disease, combinatorial results from older clinical
trials that did not use taxanes did not show a beneﬁt of
peri-operative ChT for patients with MSI-H gastric cancer38;
however, data from a small number of MSI-H patients
treated with FLOT demonstrated better response rates than
historical rates with platinume5-FU.75 Therefore, if a
response is required to downstage an MSI-H tumour before
surgery, FLOT is recommended. This does not, however,
imply that FLOT is better than surgery alone as no control
group was available to compare in the FLOT4 trial. In the
future, it is likely that chemoimmunotherapy or immunotherapy alone76 may be alternative treatment choices.
Recommendations
 Multidisciplinary treatment planning before any treatment decision is mandatory [IV, B].

Resection
 Endoscopic or surgical resection alone is appropriate for
selected very early tumours (stage IA) [III, B].
 For stage IB-III gastric cancer, peri-operative therapy and
radical gastrectomy is recommended [I, A].
 Patients should undergo D2 resection in a high-volume
surgical centre [II, B].

Peri-operative ChT
 Peri-operative (pre- and post-operative) ChT is recommended for patients with stage IB resectable gastric
cancer [I, A].
 A triplet ChT regimen including a ﬂuoropyrimidine, a
platinum compound and docetaxel should be given
when possible [I, A].
 Peri-operative use of FLOT is standard of care for
patients who are able to tolerate a triple cytotoxic
drug regimen [I, A; ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt
Scale (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: A].
 For patients unﬁt for triplet ChT, a combination of a
ﬂuoropyrimidine with cisplatin or oxaliplatin is recommended [II, B].
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1011

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

Adjuvant treatment
 For patients with stage IB gastric cancer who have undergone surgery without administration of preoperative
ChT, adjuvant ChT is recommended [I, A].
 For patients who have undergone surgery with clear
margins (R0), post-operative RT has no added beneﬁt
and should not be given [I, D].
 For patients undergoing peri- or post-operative ChT, the
addition of post-operative RT has no added beneﬁt and
should not be given [I, E].
 For patients who have not received preoperative ChT
and have not undergone an appropriate D2 lymphadenectomy, adjuvant CRT can be considered [I, C].
 For patients who have undergone surgery with involved
margins (R1), adjuvant RT or CRT might be considered as
an individual recommendation, but is not standard
[IV, C].
 For patients with MSI-H gastric cancer who have undergone curative surgery, adjuvant ChT cannot be recommended [IV, D], but if a response is required to
downstage a tumour before surgery, FLOT is
recommended.
MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED AND METASTATIC DISEASE
Locally advanced unresectable or metastatic gastric cancer
has a poor prognosis; survival in clinical trials assessing the
value of ChT has historically been <1 year in non-Asian
countries.32 ChT improves survival in comparison to best
supportive care, and combination ChT improves survival
compared with single-agent 5-FU.77 Additionally, the use of
nivolumab with ChT has recently improved survival for
patients with advanced/metastatic disease31 and
trastuzumabeChT has improved survival in patients with
HER2-positive advanced/metastatic disease.30
First-line ChT, targeted therapy and immunotherapy
A proposed algorithm for the ﬁrst-line treatment of
advanced and metastatic gastric cancer is shown in Figure 2.
ChT. Standard ﬁrst-line ChT for gastric cancer is a platinume
ﬂuoropyrimidine doublet. Oxaliplatin and cisplatin are the
most commonly used platinum drugs, whereas ﬂuoropyrimidines may be administered as an infusion (5-FU) or as
oral treatment [capecitabine or tegafuregimeracileoteracil
(S-1)]. Cisplatin and oxaliplatin were shown to be equally
effective in RCTs.78,79 In older patients (aged >65 years),
oxaliplatin has a superior safety proﬁle and may be associated with improved survival.79 Oral capecitabine is at least
as effective as infused 5-FU. Infused 5-FU may be favoured
when dysphagia is a problem. S-1 is commonly used in
Asian patients.80 In non-Asian populations, pharmacogenetic differences require altered dosing and reduce S-1
tolerability. For older or frail patients, results from the
phase III GO-2 trial support dose-reduced oxaliplatin-based

1012

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

Figure 2. Treatment algorithm for ﬁrst-line treatment of advanced/metastatic
unresectable gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; white: other aspects of
management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
5-FU, 5-ﬂuorouracil; ChT, chemotherapy; CPS, combined positive score; EMA,
European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of
Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; HER2, human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2; IHC, immunohistochemistry; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude
of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; PD-L1, programmed death-ligand 1; S-1, tegafure
gimeracileoteracil.
a
Recommended platinum compounds are oxaliplatin or cisplatin. Oxaliplatin is
preferred, especially for older patients. Recommended ﬂuoropyrimidines are
intravenous 5-FU, oral capecitabine or oral S-1. Irinotecane5-FU can be
considered an alternative option for patients who do not tolerate platinum
compounds.
b
HER2 IHC 3þ or IHC 2þ/FISH-positive.
c
PD-L1 status should be reported according to the CPS.
d
ESMO-MCBS v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications
approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMOMCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee
(https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
e
ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned
by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.111
f
NivolumabeChT is recommended for advanced, untreated gastric cancer with a
PD-L1 CPS score 5 (FDA approved without PD-L1 CPS restriction, EMA approved
for PD-L1 CPS 5).
g
Gastrectomy is not recommended in metastatic gastric cancer unless required
for palliation of symptoms.
h
Resection of metastases cannot be recommended in general, but might be
considered as an individual approach in highly selected cases with oligometastatic disease and response to ChT.

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

ChT, demonstrating lower toxicity and comparable survival
outcomes versus standard dosing.81
The addition of a taxane to a platinum doublet increased
radiological response rates and OS in one older phase III
randomised trial, but was associated with substantially
increased toxicity.82 Phase II trials evaluating taxane-based
triplets showed higher toxicity but did not provide level I
evidence of higher efﬁcacy.83-85 In the large phase III
JCOG1013 study, Japanese patients with advanced gastric
cancer were randomly assigned to receive either cisplatine
S-1 or cisplatineS-1edocetaxel.86 No differences in radiological response rate, PFS or OS were demonstrated
between the treatment groups. Due to higher levels of
toxicity and uncertain survival beneﬁt over recommended
doublet regimens, ﬁrst-line taxane-based triplet ChT is not
recommended as a standard approach.
Irinotecane5-FU has been evaluated in comparison to
cisplatine5-FU and to ECX in randomised phase III trials and
demonstrated superior time to treatment failure compared
with ECX (HR 0.77; 95% CI 0.63-0.93; log-rank P ¼ 0.008).
Irinotecane5-FU can be considered an alternative option
for patients who do not tolerate platinum compounds.87,88
HER2-positive tumours. Adding trastuzumab to ChT is recommended for patients with HER2-overexpressing (HER2
IHC 3þ or IHC 2þ/FISH positive) gastric cancer, based on
the phase III ToGA study, which demonstrated higher
response rates and longer OS (HR 0.74; 95% CI 0.60-0.91;
P ¼ 0.0046) with trastuzumabeChT compared with ChT
alone; additional toxicity was low and manageable.30
Immunotherapy. The phase III CheckMate 649 study evaluated the addition of nivolumab to ChT (either
capecitabineeoxaliplatin or 5-FUeleucovorineoxaliplatin)
in patients with treatment-naive gastric, OGJ or oesophageal cancer.31 NivolumabeChT resulted in signiﬁcant
improvements in OS (HR 0.71; 98.4% CI 0.59-0.86;
P < 0.0001) and PFS (HR 0.68; 98% CI 0.56-0.81;
P < 0.0001) versus ChT alone in patients with a PD-L1 CPS
5 (minimum follow-up 12.1 months).
In the phase III KEYNOTE-062 trial, pembrolizumab
monotherapy was non-inferior to cisplatineﬂuoropyrimidine
ChT for OS in patients with PD-L1 CPS 1, but was associated
with lower response rates and inferior PFS, and is therefore
not recommended.89 Pembrolizumab is approved for
patients with AC of the oesophagus and OGJ expressing PD-L1
CPS 10, based on the results of the phase III KEYNOTE-590
trial90; however, KEYNOTE-590 included relatively few
patients with AC.
Patients with MSI-H gastric cancer have high response
rates and excellent long-term outcomes when treated with
anti-PD-1 monotherapy.41,91
Second- and later-line treatment
A proposed algorithm for the second-line treatment of
advanced and metastatic gastric cancer is shown in Figure 3.
In previously treated gastric cancer, treatment options often
follow clinical trials which have enrolled patients with
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

gastric and OGJ cancer. The standard ChT options are
paclitaxel, docetaxel and irinotecan, which have equivalent
efﬁcacy but different toxicity proﬁles.77,92 5-FUeleucovorineirinotecan (FOLFIRI) is also used, but there are
limited data to support this regimen.88 The addition of the
anti-vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2 (VEGFR2)
antibody, ramucirumab, to paclitaxel improves overall
response rate (ORR), PFS and OS, based on the results of
the phase III RAINBOW trial.93 In the phase III REGARD trial,
ramucirumab monotherapy demonstrated limited response
rates but improved OS compared with placebo.94 In the
phase III KEYNOTE-061 trial, pembrolizumab monotherapy
did not improve survival compared with ChT in second-line
gastroesophageal cancer,95 but an exploratory subgroup
analysis suggested a beneﬁt in advanced MSI-H gastric
cancer.41 In the phase II KEYNOTE-158 trial, pembrolizumab
monotherapy was highly active in patients with previously
treated advanced MSI-H gastric cancer, demonstrating an
ORR of 45.8% and a median PFS of 11 months, with median
OS and median duration of response not yet reached.96
Such results have never been reported with ChT. If available, pembrolizumab should therefore be the preferred
treatment in this setting.
Trials evaluating second-line trastuzumab combinations,
lapatinib and trastuzumab emtansine have been negative
in patients with HER2-positive gastric cancer who have
progressed on trastuzumab32; however, a recent phase II
Asian randomised trial evaluating the HER2-targeting
antibody drug conjugate, trastuzumab deruxtecan,
compared with ChT in HER2-positive pre-treated gastric
cancer reported a survival beneﬁt for trastuzumab
deruxtecan-treated patients.97 Conﬁrmatory global trials
have demonstrated comparable response rates in nonAsian populations.98
In the third-line setting for patients with gastric cancer,
treatment with triﬂuridineetipiracil has the strongest evidence base following the phase III TAGS trial.99 Alternative
treatments in chemorefractory gastric cancer include a
taxane or irinotecan.77 A proposed algorithm for the thirdline treatment of advanced and metastatic gastric cancer is
shown in Figure 4.
Surgery for metastatic gastric cancer
The randomised phase III REGATTA trial demonstrated that
gastrectomy in addition to ChT without resection of metastases for oligometastatic gastric cancer did not improve
survival compared with ChT alone.100 The phase II AIOFLOT3 trial reported favourable outcomes in patients with
oligometastatic disease after FLOT induction followed by
gastrectomy plus resection of the metastatic site, but this
study was not randomised.101 The potential beneﬁt of
surgery in oligometastatic gastric cancer is currently being
explored in two ongoing randomised phase III trials [RENAISSANCE (NCT0257836) and SURGIGAST (NCT03042169)],
but at the present time, data to support routine resection
or ablation of oligometastases are limited.102 In case of
limited peritoneal carcinomatosis, addition of HIPEC to
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1013

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

Figure 3. Treatment algorithm for second-line treatment of advanced/metastatic unresectable gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; white: other aspects of management; blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, mismatch repair deﬁcient; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food
and Drug Administration; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; tx, treatment.
a
ESMO-MCBS v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working
Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
b
ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.111

cytoreduction has been reported to be safe and may be
associated with some improved oncological outcomes, but
is yet to be conﬁrmed in larger trials.47-49 Peri-operative ChT
with or without HIPEC may also be a strategy for patients
with CYþ without gross peritoneal metastases, but the
prognostic beneﬁt of gastrectomy in this situation is
currently not established.50-52
Pressurised intraperitoneal aerosol ChT (PIPAC) is a
recently developed technique that allows homogeneous
locoregional application of intraperitoneal ChT during a
laparoscopic procedure. This technique could offer a valuable alternative for patients with unresectable peritoneal
disease. Results from the randomised, controlled, multicentre phase II PIPAC EstoK 01 trial evaluating PIPAC in
addition to intravenous ChT are awaited.103

Supportive care and nutrition
Supportive care is critical for the well-being of patients with
gastric cancer. A recent randomised phase III trial demonstrated an increase in survival of 3 months for patients who
received multidisciplinary supportive care compared with
those who received standard ChT.104 Supportive care includes both palliation of symptoms and nutritional support.
1014

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

Weight loss is multifactorial and may be due to
obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract, anorexia, malabsorption or hypermetabolism. In clinical trial datasets,
weight loss of 10% before treatment and 3% during the
ﬁrst cycle of treatment is associated with reduced OS.105
Dysphagia due to proximal gastric tumours may be
relieved by RT or stent placement.106 Single-dose brachytherapy may be a preferred option even after external RT,
since it provides better long-term relief of dysphagia with
fewer complications than metal stent placement. Stenting is
warranted in patients with severe dysphagia, especially with
short life expectancy, since the effect on swallowing is
immediate, whereas RT (both brachytherapy and external
beam) takes around 4-6 weeks for relief of dysphagia.107
Options for patients who are not suitable for RT or stent
placement include enteral feeding using nasojejunal or
nasogastric tubes, or placement of percutaneous feeding
tubes. Distal gastric outlet obstruction may be treated by
pyloric stenting or bypass surgery.
Recommendations
First-line ChT, targeted therapy and immunotherapy
 First-line ChT with a platinum and ﬂuoropyrimidine is
recommended. Oxaliplatin is preferred, especially for
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

Second- and later-line treatment
 Ramucirumabepaclitaxel is recommended for secondline treatment of gastric cancer [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 2]. Ramucirumab monotherapy is also an option
[I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1].
 Where ramucirumab is not available, paclitaxel, docetaxel or irinotecan monotherapy [I, A] or FOLFIRI [II, B]
are recommended.
 Treatment with trastuzumab is not recommended after
ﬁrst-line therapy in HER2-positive advanced gastric
cancer [I, D], but trastuzumab deruxtecan may be
considered [II, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; Food
and Drug Administration (FDA) approved, not EMA
approved].
 Pembrolizumab is recommended for second-line treatment of patients with MSI-H/dMMR gastric cancer [II,
A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; ESCAT score: I-B].
 For patients previously treated with two lines of therapy,
triﬂuridineetipiracil is recommended [I, A; ESMO-MCBS
v1.1 score: 3]. Alternative treatments include a taxane
or irinotecan [II, B].
Surgery for metastatic gastric cancer
 Gastrectomy is not recommended in metastatic gastric
cancer unless required for palliation of symptoms [I, D].
 Resection of metastases cannot be recommended in
general, but might be considered as an individual
approach in highly selected cases with oligometastatic
disease and response to ChT [V, C].
Figure 4. Treatment algorithm for third-line treatment of advanced/metastatic unresectable gastric cancer.
Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; white: other aspects of management;
blue: systemic anticancer therapy.
ChT, chemotherapy; i.v., intravenous; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt
Scale.
a
ESMO-MCBS v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications
approved by the European Medicines Agency or Food and Drug Administration.
The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/
esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
b
If not given previously for advanced/metastatic disease.








older patients [I, A]. S-1 is commonly used in Asian
patients [I, A].
Due to higher levels of toxicity and uncertain survival
beneﬁt over recommended doublet regimens, ﬁrst-line
taxane-based triplet ChT is not recommended as a standard approach [I, C].
Irinotecane5-FU can be considered an alternative option
for patients who do not tolerate platinum compounds
[II, B].
TrastuzumabeChT is recommended in patients with
HER2-positive tumours [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3;
ESCAT score: I-A].
NivolumabeChT is recommended for advanced,
untreated gastric, OGJ and oesophageal cancer with a
PD-L1 CPS 5 [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
Pembrolizumab is approved for patients with AC of the
oesophagus and OGJ expressing PD-L1 CPS 10 [II, C;
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Supportive care and nutrition
 Care for patients with gastric cancer should include an
early palliative care referral and nutritional support [I, A].

FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND
SURVIVORSHIP
In the setting of resectable gastric cancer, the complexity
of treatment frequently induces symptoms that
adversely affect health-related quality of life. Regular
follow-up may allow investigation and treatment of
symptoms, psychological support and early detection of
recurrence, though there is no evidence that it improves
survival outcomes. Follow-up should be tailored to the
individual patient and stage of disease.108 Dietary support is recommended, with attention to vitamin and
mineral deﬁciencies.109,110
In the advanced disease setting, regular follow-up is
recommended to detect symptoms of disease progression
before signiﬁcant clinical deterioration. If disease progression is suspected, then a clinical history, physical examination and directed blood tests should be carried out.
Radiological investigations should be carried out in patients
who are candidates for further cancer-speciﬁc therapies.
For patients receiving cancer-speciﬁc therapies such as ChT,
CT of the thorax/abdomen plus speciﬁc body regions of
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1015

Annals of Oncology
interest, if necessary, are typically recommended every 6-12
weeks in order to avoid futile therapy and to switch to
alternative treatment options, if available.
The aggressive nature of gastric cancer and historically
poor outcomes even in the setting of resectable disease
mean that the concept of survivorship is only now beginning to evolve. Long-term implications, late effects of
therapy and the psychosocial impact of treatment have
been poorly studied to date.

Recommendations
 Regular follow-up is recommended for investigation and
treatment of symptoms, psychological support and early
detection of recurrence [III, B].
 Follow-up should be tailored to the individual patient
and stage of disease [V, B].
 Dietary support is recommended with attention to
vitamin and mineral deﬁciencies [V, B].
 In the advanced disease setting, regular follow-up is recommended to detect symptoms of disease progression
before signiﬁcant clinical deterioration [IV, B].
 Radiological investigations, speciﬁcally CT of the thorax
and abdomen, should be carried out every 6-12 weeks
in patients who are candidates for further cancerspeciﬁc therapies [IV, B].

METHODOLOGY
This CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO
standard operating procedures for CPG development
(http://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-GuidelinesMethodology). The relevant literature has been selected by
the expert authors. An ESCAT table with ESCAT scores is
included in Supplementary Table S1, available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004. ESCAT scores have
been deﬁned by the authors and validated by the ESMO
Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working
Group.111 An ESMO-MCBS table with ESMO-MCBS scores is
included in Supplementary Table S4, available at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004.
ESMO-MCBS
v1.1112 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA (https://www.esmo.
org/Guidelines/ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by
the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA or other
regulatory body approval statuses of new therapies/indications are reported at the time of writing this CPG. Levels
of evidence and grades of recommendation have been
applied using the system shown in Supplementary Table S5,
available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.
004.113,114 Statements without grading were considered
justiﬁed standard clinical practice by the authors. Future
updates to this CPG will be published on esmo.org as a
Living Guideline version or an eUpdate, to be made available at: https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/gastrointestinalcancers/gastric-cancer.
1016

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

F. Lordick et al.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Jennifer Lamarre
(ESMO Guidelines staff) and Angela Corstorphine and SianMarie Lucas of Kstorﬁn Medical Communications Ltd (KMC);
this support was funded by ESMO. Nathan Cherny, Chair of the
ESMO-MCBS Working Group, Urani Dafni ESMO-MCBS
Working Group Member/Frontier Science Foundation Hellas
and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas provided review and validation of the ESMO-MCBS scores. Nicola
Latino (ESMO Scientiﬁc Affairs staff) provided coordination
and support of the ESMO-MCBS scores and Angela Corstorphine and Sian-Marie Lucas of KMC provided medical
writing and editing support in the preparation of the ESMOMCBS table; this support was funded by ESMO. Dr Benedikt
Westphalen, Dr Noelia Tarazona (members of the ESMO
Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working
Group) and Dr Svetlana Jezdic (ESMO Medical Affairs Advisor)
provided validation support for ESCAT scores.
FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation
of this guideline. Production costs have been covered by
ESMO, Switzerland from central funds.
DISCLOSURE
FL reports personal fees for advisory board membership of
Amgen, Astellas Pharma, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS), Bayer,
Beigene, BioNTech, Eli Lilly, Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD),
Novartis, Roche and Daiichi-Sankyo; personal fees as an
invited speaker for AstraZeneca, BMS, Eli Lilly, Imedex,
Incyte, MedUpdate, Medscape, Merck Serono, MSD, Roche,
Servier and StreamedUp!; personal fees from BioNTech and
Elsevier for expert testimony; personal fees for writing engagements for Deutscher Ärzteverlag, Iomedico and
Springer-Nature and a research grant paid to his institute
from BMS. SC reports personal fees as an invited speaker
from Amgen, Lilly and Servier and personal fees for advisory
board membership of BMS, Daiichi, Lilly, MSD and Servier.
TF reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen,
Bayer, Bristol and Servier; non-remunerated activities as
principal investigator (PI) for Adapt Immune, BeiGene and
Daiichi Sankyo. KH reports personal fees as for an editorial
role as Clinical Editor for Radiotherapy & Oncology. GP reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen and
Roche; personal fees for advisory board membership from
Astellas, BMS and MSD; personal fees for writing engagement and participation in a study on immunonutrition from
Nestle; institutional funding as a local PI for Bard, BMS and
MSD; non-remunerated advisory role on the French board
on colorectal surgery of Johnson & Johnson and participation in the Medtronic-sponsored European group of upper
GI surgeons dedicated to minimally invasive surgery. AV
reports personal fees for speaker, consultancy and advisory
roles for AstraZeneca, Amgen, Basilea, BeiGene, Bayer,
Boehringer Mannheim, BMS, BTG, Daiichi-Sankyo, Eisai,
GlaxoSmithKline (GSK), Imaging Equipment Ltd (AAA),
Incyte, Ipsen, Jiangsu Hengrui Medicine, MSD, Pierre Fabre,
Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

Roche, Sanoﬁ, Servier, Sirtex, Tahio and Terumo; research
funding from Incyte and Servier; and participation in
educational activities for OncLive and Oncowissen.de. ECS
reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen,
BMS, Imedex, Merck, Novartis, Prova Education, Servier and
touchIME; personal fees for advisory board membership of
Astellas, AstraZeneca, BMS, My Personal Therapeutics,
Novartis, Roche and Zymeworks; other personal fees from
Amgen Trial Steering Group (TSC), BeiGene and Zymeworks
for Independent Data Monitoring Committee (IDMC)
membership, BMS for expert testimony, Everest Clinical
Research as IDMC chair; institutional funding as a local or
coordinating PI for clinical trial research from AstraZeneca,
Basilea, Daiichi Sankyo, Roche, Merus and MSD and a
research grant to her institute from BMS. FC has declared
no conﬂicts of interest.
REFERENCES
1. Ferlay J, Ervik M, Colombet M, et al. Global Cancer Observatory:
Cancer Today. Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on
Cancer. Available at https://gco.iarc.fr/today. Published 2020.
Accessed September 30, 2021.
2. GBD 2017 Stomach Collaborators. The global, regional, and national
burden of stomach cancer in 195 countries, 1990-2017: a systematic
analysis for the Global Burden of Disease study 2017. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2020;5(1):42-54.
3. Colquhoun A, Arnold M, Ferlay J, et al. Global patterns of cardia and
non-cardia gastric cancer incidence in 2012. Gut. 2015;64(12):18811888.
4. Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network. Comprehensive molecular
characterization of gastric adenocarcinoma. Nature. 2014;513(7517):
202-209.
5. Arnold M, Ferlay J, van Berge Henegouwen MI, et al. Global burden
of oesophageal and gastric cancer by histology and subsite in 2018.
Gut. 2020;69(9):1564-1571.
6. Rustgi SD, Ching CK, Kastrinos F. Inherited predisposition to gastric
cancer. Gastrointest Endosc Clin N Am. 2021;31(3):467-487.
7. Garcia-Pelaez J, Barbosa-Matos R, São José C, et al. Gastric cancer
genetic predisposition and clinical presentations: established heritable causes and potential candidate genes. Eur J Med Genet.
2022;65(1):104401.
8. Blair VR, McLeod M, Carneiro F, et al. Hereditary diffuse gastric
cancer: updated clinical practice guidelines. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(8):
e386-e397.
9. Lee K, Krempely K, Roberts ME, et al. Speciﬁcations of the ACMG/
AMP variant curation guidelines for the analysis of germline CDH1
sequence variants. Hum Mutat. 2018;39(11):1553-1568.
10. Choi IJ, Kim CG, Lee JY, et al. Family history of gastric cancer and
Helicobacter pylori treatment. N Engl J Med. 2020;382(5):427-436.
11. Ford AC, Yuan Y, Forman D, et al. Helicobacter pylori eradication for
the prevention of gastric neoplasia. Cochrane Database Syst Rev.
2020;7(7):CD005583.
12. Correa P. Gastric cancer: overview. Gastroenterol Clin North Am.
2013;42(2):211-217.
13. Choi KS, Jun JK, Suh M, et al. Effect of endoscopy screening on stage
at gastric cancer diagnosis: results of the National Cancer Screening
Programme in Korea. Br J Cancer. 2015;112(3):608-612.
14. Fan X, Qin X, Zhang Y, et al. Screening for gastric cancer in China: advances, challenges and visions. Chin J Cancer Res. 2021;33(2):168-180.
15. Mabe K, Inoue K, Kamada T, et al. Endoscopic screening for gastric
cancer in Japan: Current status and future perspectives. Dig Endosc.
2022;34(3):412-419.
16. Banks M, Graham D, Jansen M, et al. British Society of Gastroenterology guidelines on the diagnosis and management of patients at
risk of gastric adenocarcinoma. Gut. 2019;68(9):1545-1575.

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

17. Cubiella J, Pérez Aisa Á, Cuatrecasas M, et al. Gastric cancer screening
in low incidence populations: position statement of AEG, SEED and
SEAP. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2021;44(1):67-86.
18. Allum W, Lordick F, Alsina M, et al. ECCO essential requirements for
quality cancer care: oesophageal and gastric cancer. Crit Rev Oncol
Hematol. 2018;122:179-193.
19. Gullo I, Grillo F, Molinaro L, et al. Minimum biopsy set for HER2
evaluation in gastric and gastro-esophageal junction cancer. Endosc
Int Open. 2015;3(2):E165-E170.
20. Tominaga N, Gotoda T, Hara M, et al. Five biopsy specimens from the
proximal part of the tumor reliably determine HER2 protein expression status in gastric cancer. Gastric Cancer. 2016;19(2):553-560.
21. Hamada K, Itoh T, Kawaura K, et al. Examination of endoscopic ultrasonographic diagnosis for the depth of early gastric cancer. J Clin
Med Res. 2021;13(4):222-229.
22. Ono H, Yao K, Fujishiro M, et al. Guidelines for endoscopic submucosal dissection and endoscopic mucosal resection for early gastric
cancer (second edition). Dig Endosc. 2021;33(1):4-20.
23. Endoscopic Classiﬁcation Review Group. Update on the Paris classiﬁcation of superﬁcial neoplastic lesions in the digestive tract.
Endoscopy. 2005;37(6):570-578.
24. Borrmann R. Geschwulste des Magens und Duodenum. In: Henke F,
Lubarch O, editors. Handbuch der Spezielen Pathologischen Anatomie
und Histology. Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag; 1926.
25. Carneiro F, Fukayama M, Grabsch HI, et al. Gastric adenocarcinoma.
In: WHO Classiﬁcation of Tumours Editorial Board, ed. Digestive
System Tumours. 5th ed Lyon, France: International Agency for
Research on Cancer; 2019. p. 85-95.
26. Japanese Gastric Cancer Association. Japanese classiﬁcation of gastric
carcinoma. 15th ed. Tokyo, Japan: Kanehara Shuppan; 2017.
27. Nakamura K, Sugano H, Takagi K. Carcinoma of the stomach in
incipient phase: its histogenesis and histological appearances. Gan.
1968;59(3):251-258.
28. Lauren P. The two histological main types of gastric carcinoma: diffuse
and so-called intestinal-type carcinoma. An attempt at a histo-clinical
classiﬁcation. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand. 1965;64:31-49.
29. Cristescu R, Lee J, Nebozhyn M, et al. Molecular analysis of gastric
cancer identiﬁes subtypes associated with distinct clinical outcomes.
Nat Med. 2015;21(5):449-456.
30. Bang YJ, Van Cutsem E, Feyereislova A, et al. Trastuzumab in combination with chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for treatment of HER2-positive advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal
junction cancer (ToGA): a phase 3, open-label, randomised controlled
trial. Lancet. 2010;376(9742):687-697.
31. Janjigian YY, Shitara K, Moehler M, et al. First-line nivolumab plus
chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for advanced gastric,
gastro-oesophageal junction, and oesophageal adenocarcinoma
(CheckMate 649): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2021;398(10294):27-40.
32. Smyth EC, Nilsson M, Grabsch HI, et al. Gastric cancer. Lancet.
2020;396(10251):635-648.
33. Haffner I, Schierle K, Raimúndez E, et al. HER2 expression, test deviations, and their impact on survival in metastatic gastric cancer:
results from the prospective multicenter VARIANZ study. J Clin Oncol.
2021;39(13):1468-1478.
34. Kulangara K, Zhang N, Corigliano E, et al. Clinical utility of the combined positive score for programmed death ligand-1 expression and
the approval of pembrolizumab for treatment of gastric cancer. Arch
Pathol Lab Med. 2019;143(3):330-337.
35. Wainberg ZA, Fuchs CS, Tabernero J, et al. Efﬁcacy of pembrolizumab
monotherapy for advanced gastric/gastroesophageal junction cancer
with programmed death ligand 1 combined positive score 10. Clin
Cancer Res. 2021;27(7):1923-1931.
36. Ahn S, Kim KM. PD-L1 expression in gastric cancer: interchangeability
of 22C3 and 28-8 pharmDx assays for responses to immunotherapy.
Mod Pathol. 2021;34(9):1719-1727.
37. Yeong J, Lum HYJ, Teo CB, et al. Choice of PD-L1 immunohistochemistry assay inﬂuences clinical eligibility for gastric cancer
immunotherapy. Gastric Cancer. 2022;25:741-750.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1017

Annals of Oncology
38. Pietrantonio F, Miceli R, Raimondi A, et al. Individual patient data
meta-analysis of the value of microsatellite instability as a biomarker
in gastric cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(35):3392-3400.
39. Lordick F. Chemotherapy for resectable microsatellite instability-high
gastric cancer? Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(2):203.
40. Smyth EC. Chemotherapy for resectable microsatellite instability-high
gastric cancer? Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(2):204.
41. Chao J, Fuchs CS, Shitara K, et al. Assessment of pembrolizumab
therapy for the treatment of microsatellite instability-high gastric or
gastroesophageal junction cancer among patients in the KEYNOTE059, KEYNOTE-061, and KEYNOTE-062 clinical trials. JAMA Oncol.
2021;7(6):895-902.
42. Kwee RM, Kwee TC. Imaging in local staging of gastric cancer: a
systematic review. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(15):2107-2116.
43. Nie RC, Yuan SQ, Chen XJ, et al. Endoscopic ultrasonography
compared with multidetector computed tomography for the preoperative staging of gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. World J Surg Oncol.
2017;15(1):113.
44. Gertsen EC, Brenkman HJF, van Hillegersberg R, et al. 18F-ﬂudeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography/computed tomography and
laparoscopy for staging of locally advanced gastric cancer: a multicenter prospective Dutch cohort study (PLASTIC). JAMA Surg.
2021;156(12):e215340.
45. Ramos RF, Scalon FM, Scalon MM, et al. Staging laparoscopy in
gastric cancer to detect peritoneal metastases: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2016;42(9):1315-1321.
46. Harmon RL, Sugarbaker PH. Prognostic indicators in peritoneal carcinomatosis from gastrointestinal cancer. Int Semin Surg Oncol. 2005;2(1):3.
47. Bonnot PE, Piessen G, Kepenekian V, et al. Cytoreductive surgery with
or without hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy for gastric
cancer with peritoneal metastases (CYTO-CHIP study): a propensity
score analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(23):2028-2040.
48. Bonnot PE, Lintis A, Mercier F, et al. Prognosis of poorly cohesive
gastric cancer after complete cytoreductive surgery with or without
hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy (CYTO-CHIP study). Br J
Surg. 2021;108(10):1225-1235.
49. Rau B, Lang H, Konigsrainer A, et al. The effect of hyperthermic
intraperitoneal chemotherapy (HIPEC) upon cytoreductive surgery
(CRS) in gastric cancer (GC) with synchronous peritoneal metastasis
(PM): A randomized multicentre phase III trial (GASTRIPEC-I-trial).
Ann Oncol. 2021;32(suppl 5):S1040-S1075.
50. Kobayashi H, Honda M, Kawamura H, et al. Clinical impact of gastrectomy
for gastric cancer patients with positive lavage cytology without gross
peritoneal dissemination. J Surg Oncol. 2022;125(4):615-620.
51. Higaki E, Yanagi S, Gotohda N, et al. Intraoperative peritoneal lavage
cytology offers prognostic signiﬁcance for gastric cancer patients with
curative resection. Cancer Sci. 2017;108(5):978-986.
52. Valletti M, Eshmuminov D, Gnecco N, et al. Gastric cancer with
positive peritoneal cytology: survival beneﬁt after induction chemotherapy and conversion to negative peritoneal cytology. World J Surg
Oncol. 2021;19(1):245.
53. Stomach cancer. In: Amin MB, Edge S, Greene F, et al., editors. AJCC
Cancer Staging Manual. 8th ed. New York, NY: Springer; 2017. p. 203-220.
54. Stomach. In: Brierley JD, Gospodarowicz MK, Wittekind C, editors.
UICC TNM Classiﬁcation of Malignant Tumours. 8th ed. Oxford, UK:
Wiley-Blackwell; 2017.
55. European Medicines Agency. EMA recommendations on DPD testing
prior to treatment with ﬂuorouracil, capecitabine, tegafur and ﬂucytosine. Available at https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/
press-release/ema-recommendations-dpd-testing-prior-treatmentﬂuorouracil-capecitabine-tegafur-ﬂucytosine_en.pdf. Published 2020.
Accessed June 20, 2022.
56. Pimentel-Nunes P, Dinis-Ribeiro M, Ponchon T, et al. Endoscopic
submucosal dissection: European Society of Gastrointestinal Endoscopy (ESGE) Guideline. Endoscopy. 2015;47(9):829-854.
57. Probst A, Schneider A, Schaller T, et al. Endoscopic submucosal
dissection for early gastric cancer: are expanded resection criteria
safe for Western patients? Endoscopy. 2017;49(9):855-865.

1018

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

F. Lordick et al.
58. Maspero M, Sposito C, Benedetti A, et al. Impact of surgical margins
on overall survival after gastrectomy for gastric cancer: a validation of
Japanese gastric cancer association guidelines on a Western series.
Ann Surg Oncol. 2022;29(5):3096-3108.
59. De Manzoni G, Marrelli D, Baiocchi GL, et al. The Italian Research
Group for Gastric Cancer (GIRCG) guidelines for gastric cancer staging
and treatment: 2015. Gastric Cancer. 2017;20(1):20-30.
60. Japanese Gastric Cancer Association. Japanese gastric cancer treatment guidelines 2018 (5th edition). Gastric Cancer. 2021;24(1):1-21.
61. Mortensen K, Nilsson M, Slim K, et al. Consensus guidelines for
enhanced recovery after gastrectomy: Enhanced Recovery After
Surgery (ERAS®) Society recommendations. Br J Surg. 2014;101(10):
1209-1229.
62. Quan Y, Huang A, Ye M, et al. Comparison of laparoscopic versus open
gastrectomy for advanced gastric cancer: an updated meta-analysis.
Gastric Cancer. 2016;19(3):939-950.
63. Cunningham D, Allum WH, Stenning SP, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy versus surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2006;355(1):11-20.
64. Ychou M, Boige V, Pignon JP, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy
compared with surgery alone for resectable gastroesophageal
adenocarcinoma: an FNCLCC and FFCD multicenter phase III trial.
J Clin Oncol. 2011;29(13):1715-1721.
65. Al-Batran SE, Homann N, Pauligk C, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy
with ﬂuorouracil plus leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and docetaxel versus
ﬂuorouracil or capecitabine plus cisplatin and epirubicin for locally
advanced, resectable gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma (FLOT4): a randomised, phase 2/3 trial. Lancet.
2019;393(10184):1948-1957.
66. Paoletti X, Oba K, Burzykowski T, et al. Beneﬁt of adjuvant chemotherapy for resectable gastric cancer: a meta-analysis. JAMA.
2010;303(17):1729-1737.
67. Cats A, Jansen EPM, van Grieken NCT, et al. Chemotherapy versus
chemoradiotherapy after surgery and preoperative chemotherapy for
resectable gastric cancer (CRITICS): an international, open-label,
randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2018;19(5):616-628.
68. de Steur WO, van Amelsfoort RM, Hartgrink HH, et al. Adjuvant
chemotherapy is superior to chemoradiation after D2 surgery for
gastric cancer in the per-protocol analysis of the randomized CRITICS
trial. Ann Oncol. 2021;32(3):360-367.
69. Lee J, Lim DH, Kim S, et al. Phase III trial comparing capecitabine plus
cisplatin versus capecitabine plus cisplatin with concurrent capecitabine radiotherapy in completely resected gastric cancer with D2 lymph
node dissection: the ARTIST trial. J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(3):268-273.
70. Park SH, Lim DH, Sohn TS, et al. A randomized phase III trial
comparing adjuvant single-agent S1, S-1 with oxaliplatin, and postoperative chemoradiation with S-1 and oxaliplatin in patients with
node-positive gastric cancer after D2 resection: the ARTIST 2 trial(5).
Ann Oncol. 2021;32(3):368-374.
71. Park SH, Sohn TS, Lee J, et al. Phase III trial to compare adjuvant
chemotherapy with capecitabine and cisplatin versus concurrent
chemoradiotherapy in gastric cancer: ﬁnal report of the adjuvant
chemoradiotherapy in stomach tumors trial, including survival and
subset analyses. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(28):3130-3136.
72. Macdonald JS, Smalley SR, Benedetti J, et al. Chemoradiotherapy
after surgery compared with surgery alone for adenocarcinoma of the
stomach or gastroesophageal junction. N Engl J Med. 2001;345(10):
725-730.
73. Dikken JL, Jansen EP, Cats A, et al. Impact of the extent of surgery and
postoperative chemoradiotherapy on recurrence patterns in gastric
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(14):2430-2436.
74. Ho VKY, Jansen EPM, Wijnhoven BPL, et al. Adjuvant chemoradiotherapy for non-pretreated gastric cancer. Ann Surg Oncol.
2017;24(12):3647-3657.
75. Al-Batran SE, Lorenzen S, Homann N, et al. Pathological regression in
patients with microsatellite instability (MSI) receiving perioperative
atezolizumab in combination with FLOT vs. FLOT alone for resectable
esophagogastric adenocarcinoma: results from the DANTE trial of the

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

Annals of Oncology

F. Lordick et al.

76.

77.
78.
79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

89.

90.

91.

German Gastric Group at the AIO and SAKK. Ann Oncol.
2021;32(suppl_5):S1069.
Andre T, Tougeron D, Piessen G, et al. Neoadjuvant nivolumab plus
ipilimumab and adjuvant nivolumab in patients (pts) with localized
microsatellite instability-high (MSI)/mismatch repair deﬁcient
(dMMR) oeso-gastric adenocarcinoma (OGA): The GERCOR NEONIPIGA phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2022;40(suppl 4):244.
Wagner AD, Syn NL, Moehler M, et al. Chemotherapy for advanced
gastric cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2017;8(8):CD004064.
Cunningham D, Starling N, Rao S, et al. Capecitabine and oxaliplatin for
advanced esophagogastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 2008;358(1):36-46.
Al-Batran SE, Hartmann JT, Probst S, et al. Phase III trial in metastatic
gastroesophageal adenocarcinoma with ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin plus
either oxaliplatin or cisplatin: a study of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft
Internistische Onkologie. J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(9):1435-1442.
Koizumi W, Narahara H, Hara T, et al. S-1 plus cisplatin versus S-1
alone for ﬁrst-line treatment of advanced gastric cancer (SPIRITS
trial): a phase III trial. Lancet Oncol. 2008;9(3):215-221.
Hall PS, Swinson D, Cairns DA, et al. Efﬁcacy of reduced-intensity
chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and capecitabine on quality of life
and cancer control among older and frail patients with advanced
gastroesophageal cancer: the GO2 phase 3 randomized clinical trial.
JAMA Oncol. 2021;7(6):869-877.
Van Cutsem E, Moiseyenko VM, Tjulandin S, et al. Phase III study of
docetaxel and cisplatin plus ﬂuorouracil compared with cisplatin and
ﬂuorouracil as ﬁrst-line therapy for advanced gastric cancer: a report
of the V325 Study Group. J Clin Oncol. 2006;24(31):4991-4997.
Al-Batran SE, Hartmann JT, Hofheinz R, et al. Biweekly ﬂuorouracil,
leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and docetaxel (FLOT) for patients with metastatic adenocarcinoma of the stomach or esophagogastric junction:
a phase II trial of the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie.
Ann Oncol. 2008;19(11):1882-1887.
Shah MA, Janjigian YY, Stoller R, et al. Randomized multicenter phase
II study of modiﬁed docetaxel, cisplatin, and ﬂuorouracil (DCF) versus
DCF plus growth factor support in patients with metastatic gastric
adenocarcinoma: a study of the US gastric cancer consortium. J Clin
Oncol. 2015;33(33):3874-3879.
Van Cutsem E, Boni C, Tabernero J, et al. Docetaxel plus oxaliplatin
with or without ﬂuorouracil or capecitabine in metastatic or locally
recurrent gastric cancer: a randomized phase II study. Ann Oncol.
2015;26(1):149-156.
Yamada Y, Boku N, Mizusawa J, et al. Docetaxel plus cisplatin and S-1
versus cisplatin and S-1 in patients with advanced gastric cancer
(JCOG1013): an open-label, phase 3, randomised controlled trial.
Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2019;4(7):501-510.
Dank M, Zaluski J, Barone C, et al. Randomized phase III study
comparing irinotecan combined with 5-ﬂuorouracil and folinic acid to
cisplatin combined with 5-ﬂuorouracil in chemotherapy naive patients with advanced adenocarcinoma of the stomach or esophagogastric junction. Ann Oncol. 2008;19(8):1450-1457.
Guimbaud R, Louvet C, Ries P, et al. Prospective, randomized,
multicenter, phase III study of ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan
versus epirubicin, cisplatin, and capecitabine in advanced gastric
adenocarcinoma: a French intergroup (Fédération Francophone de
Cancérologie Digestive, Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte
Contre le Cancer, and Groupe Coopérateur Multidisciplinaire en
Oncologie) study. J Clin Oncol. 2014;32(31):3520-3526.
Shitara K, Van Cutsem E, Bang YJ, et al. Efﬁcacy and safety of pembrolizumab or pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy vs chemotherapy
alone for patients with ﬁrst-line, advanced gastric cancer: the
KEYNOTE-062 phase 3 randomized clinical trial. JAMA Oncol.
2020;6(10):1571-1580.
Sun JM, Shen L, Shah MA, et al. Pembrolizumab plus chemotherapy
versus chemotherapy alone for ﬁrst-line treatment of advanced
oesophageal cancer (KEYNOTE-590): a randomised, placebocontrolled, phase 3 study. Lancet. 2021;398(10302):759-771.
Pietrantonio F, Randon G, Di Bartolomeo M, et al. Predictive role of
microsatellite instability for PD-1 blockade in patients with advanced

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.

97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

106.
107.

gastric cancer: a meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials. ESMO
Open. 2021;6(1):100036.
Hironaka S, Ueda S, Yasui H, et al. Randomized, open-label, phase III
study comparing irinotecan with paclitaxel in patients with
advanced gastric cancer without severe peritoneal metastasis after
failure of prior combination chemotherapy using ﬂuoropyrimidine
plus platinum: WJOG 4007 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2013;31(35):
4438-4444.
Wilke H, Muro K, Van Cutsem E, et al. Ramucirumab plus paclitaxel
versus placebo plus paclitaxel in patients with previously treated
advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction adenocarcinoma
(RAINBOW): a double-blind, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol.
2014;15(11):1224-1235.
Fuchs CS, Tomasek J, Yong CJ, et al. Ramucirumab monotherapy for
previously treated advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal junction
adenocarcinoma (REGARD): an international, randomised, multicentre,
placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2014;383(9911):31-39.
Shitara K, Özgüroglu M, Bang YJ, et al. Pembrolizumab versus paclitaxel for previously treated, advanced gastric or gastro-oesophageal
junction cancer (KEYNOTE-061): a randomised, open-label,
controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2018;392(10142):123-133.
Marabelle A, Le DT, Ascierto PA, et al. Efﬁcacy of pembrolizumab in
patients with noncolorectal high microsatellite instability/mismatch
repair-deﬁcient cancer: results from the phase II KEYNOTE-158 study.
J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(1):1-10.
Shitara K, Bang YJ, Iwasa S, et al. Trastuzumab deruxtecan in previously treated HER2-positive gastric cancer. N Engl J Med. 2020;382
(25):2419-2430.
van Cutsem E, Di Bartolomeo M, Smyth E, et al. Primary analysis of a
phase II single-arm trial of trastuzumab deruxtecan (T-DXd) in western patients (Pts) with HER2-positive (HER2þ) unresectable or metastatic gastric or gastroesophageal junction (GEJ) cancer who
progressed on or after a trastuzumab-containing regimen. Ann Oncol.
2021;32(suppl 5):S1283-S1346.
Shitara K, Doi T, Dvorkin M, et al. Triﬂuridine/tipiracil versus placebo
in patients with heavily pretreated metastatic gastric cancer (TAGS): a
randomised, double-blind, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2018;19(11):1437-1448.
Fujitani K, Yang HK, Mizusawa J, et al. Gastrectomy plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for advanced gastric cancer with
a single non-curable factor (REGATTA): a phase 3, randomised
controlled trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(3):309-318.
Al-Batran SE, Homann N, Pauligk C, et al. Effect of neoadjuvant
chemotherapy followed by surgical resection on survival in patients
with limited metastatic gastric or gastroesophageal junction cancer:
the AIO-FLOT3 trial. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3(9):1237-1244.
Kataoka K, Kinoshita T, Moehler M, et al. Current management of
liver metastases from gastric cancer: what is common practice?
New challenge of EORTC and JCOG. Gastric Cancer. 2017;20(5):
904-912.
Eveno C, Jouvin I, Pocard M. PIPAC EstoK 01: Pressurized IntraPeritoneal Aerosol Chemotherapy with cisplatin and doxorubicin (PIPAC
C/D) in gastric peritoneal metastasis: a randomized and multicenter
phase II study. Pleura Peritoneum. 2018;3(2):20180116.
Lu Z, Fang Y, Liu C, et al. Early interdisciplinary supportive care in
patients with previously untreated metastatic esophagogastric cancer: a phase III randomized controlled trial. J Clin Oncol. 2021;39(7):
748-756.
Mansoor W, Roeland EJ, Chaudhry A, et al. Early weight loss as a
prognostic factor in patients with advanced gastric cancer: analyses
from REGARD, RAINBOW, and RAINFALL phase III studies. Oncologist.
2021;26(9):e1538-e1547.
Dai Y, Li C, Xie Y, et al. Interventions for dysphagia in oesophageal
cancer. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2014;2014(10):CD005048.
Bergquist H, Wenger U, Johnsson E, et al. Stent insertion or endoluminal brachytherapy as palliation of patients with advanced cancer of
the esophagus and gastroesophageal junction. Results of a randomized, controlled clinical trial. Dis Esophagus. 2005;18(3):131-139.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

1019

Annals of Oncology
108. Baiocchi GL, D’Ugo D, Coit D, et al. Follow-up after gastrectomy for
cancer: the Charter Scaligero Consensus Conference. Gastric Cancer.
2016;19(1):15-20.
109. Hu Y, Kim HI, Hyung WJ, et al. Vitamin B(12) deﬁciency after gastrectomy for gastric cancer: an analysis of clinical patterns and risk
factors. Ann Surg. 2013;258(6):970-975.
110. Baek KH, Jeon HM, Lee SS, et al. Short-term changes in bone and
mineral metabolism following gastrectomy in gastric cancer patients.
Bone. 2008;42(1):61-67.
111. Mateo J, Chakravarty D, Dienstmann R, et al. A framework to rank
genomic alterations as targets for cancer precision medicine: the

1020

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.07.004

F. Lordick et al.
ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT).
Ann Oncol. 2018;29(9):1895-1902.
112. Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-Magnitude of
Clinical Beneﬁt Scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):23402366.
113. Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic
infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin
Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144.
114. Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards
for infectious diseases. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin
Infect Dis. 1994;18(3):421.

Volume 33

-

Issue 10

-

2022

