Amyloid
The Journal of Protein Folding Disorders

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: https://www.tandfonline.com/loi/iamy20

Guidelines for non-transplant chemotherapy for
treatment of systemic AL amyloidosis: EHA-ISA
working group
Ashutosh D. Wechalekar, M. Teresa Cibeira, Simon D. Gibbs, Arnaud Jaccard,
Shaji Kumar, Giampaolo Merlini, Giovanni Palladini, Vaishali Sanchorawala,
Stefan Schönland, Christopher Venner, Mario Boccadoro & Efstathios
Kastritis
To cite this article: Ashutosh D. Wechalekar, M. Teresa Cibeira, Simon D. Gibbs, Arnaud
Jaccard, Shaji Kumar, Giampaolo Merlini, Giovanni Palladini, Vaishali Sanchorawala, Stefan
Schönland, Christopher Venner, Mario Boccadoro & Efstathios Kastritis (2023) Guidelines for
non-transplant chemotherapy for treatment of systemic AL amyloidosis: EHA-ISA working
group, Amyloid, 30:1, 3-17, DOI: 10.1080/13506129.2022.2093635
To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2022.2093635

© 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa
UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis
Group.

Published online: 15 Jul 2022.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 7360

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 5 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=iamy20

AMYLOID
https://doi.org/10.1080/13506129.2022.2093635

GUIDELINE ARTICLE

Guidelines for non-transplant chemotherapy for treatment of systemic
AL amyloidosis: EHA-ISA working group
Ashutosh D. Wechalekara, M. Teresa Cibeirab , Simon D. Gibbsc, Arnaud Jaccardd, Shaji Kumare ,
€nlandh , Christopher Venneri,
Giampaolo Merlinif, Giovanni Palladinif, Vaishali Sanchorawalag , Stefan Scho
j
k
Mario Boccadoro and Efstathios Kastritis
a
National Amyloidosis Centre, University College London (Royal Free Campus), London, UK; bAmyloidosis and Myeloma Unit, Hospital Clinic
of Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; cVictorian and Tasmanian Amyloidosis Service, Eastern Health Monash University Clinical School,
Box Hill, VIC, Australia; dHematology Department, French Reference Center for AL Amyloidosis (Limoges-Poitiers), CHU Limoges, Limoges,
France; eDivision of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA; fAmyloidosis Research and
Treatment Center, Foundation "Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Policlinico San Matteo" and Department of
Molecular Medicine, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy; gAmyloidosis Center, Boston University School of Medicine and Boston Medical Center,
Boston, MA, USA; hMedical Department V, Amyloidosis Center, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany; iBC Cancer, Vancouver
Centre, Vancouver, Canada; jDepartment of Molecular Biotechnology and Health Sciences, University of Turin, Turin, Italy; kDepartment of
Clinical Therapeutics, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, School of Medicine, Athens, Greece

ABSTRACT

ARTICLE HISTORY

Background: This guideline has been developed jointly by the European Society of Haematology and
International Society of Amyloidosis recommending non-transplant chemotherapy treatment for
patients with AL amyloidosis.
Methods: A review of literature and grading of evidence as well as expert recommendations by the
ESH and ISA guideline committees.
Results and Conclusions: The recommendations of this committee suggest that treatment follows
the clinical presentation which determines treatment tolerance tempered by potential side effects to
select and modify use of drugs in AL amyloidosis. All patients with AL amyloidosis should be considered for clinical trials where available. Daratumumab-VCD is recommended from most untreated
patients (VCD or VMDex if daratumumab is unavailable). At relapse, the two guiding principles are the
depth and duration of initial response, use of a class of agents not previously exposed as well as the
limitation imposed by patients’ fitness/frailty and end organ damage. Targeted agents like venetoclax
need urgent prospective evaluation. Future prospective trials should include advanced stage patients
to allow for evidence-based treatment decisions. Therapies targeting amyloid fibrils or those reducing
the proteotoxicity of amyloidogenic light chains/oligomers are urgently needed.

Received 14 March 2022
Revised 12 May 2022
Accepted 21 June 2022
KEYWORDS

Amyloidosis; non-transplant
treatment; guidelines

Abbreviations: ACE: Angiotensin Converting Enzyme Inhibitors; AL: Amyloidosis light chain; ASCT:
Autologous Stem cell transplant; BCL-2: B-cell lymphoma gene 2; BCMA: B Cell Maturation Antigen;
BDR: Bendamistine-Dexamethasone-Rituximab; BEAM: BCNU, Etoposide, Cytarabine, Melphalan; BiTE:
bispecific T-cell engager; CAR-T: Chimeric antigen receptor T-Cell; Co2: Carbon di-oxide; CR: Complete
Resposne; CRS: Cytokine release syndrome; CTCAE: Common Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events;
cTn: cardiac troponin; CyBorD: Cyclophosphamide-Bortezomib-Dexamethasone; dFLC: difference
between the involved and uninvolved light chain; dLCO: diffusion capacity for carbon monoxide; DRC:
Dexamethasone-Rituximab-Cyclophosphamide; ECOG: Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group; eGFR: estimated glomerular filteration rate; EHA: European Haematology Association; EMN: European Myeloma
Network; FLC: Free light chain; GI: Gastrointestinal; HR: haematologic response; I C d: Ixazomib-cyclophosphamide-dexamethasone; I M iD: immunomodulatory agent; iFLC: involved free light chain; IRD:
Ixazomib-lenalidomide-dexamethasone; ISA: International Society of Amyloidosis; IV: Intravenous;
LCDD: Light Chain deposition disease; locAL: Localised AL; LVEF: Left ventricular ejection fraction; m
Ab: monoclonal antibody; Mdex: Melphalan-Dexamethasone; MOD-PFS: Major organ deterioration progression free survival; MRD: Minimal Residual Disease; MTD: Maximum Tolerated Dose; MYD-88:
Myeloid differentiation primary response 88; NHL: Non-Hodgkins Lymphoma; NT-proBNP: N-terminal
fragment of pro-brain natriuretic peptide; PFS: progression free survival; PI: proteasome inhibitor; PR:
Partial Response; SAP: Serum Amyloid P Component; SLAMF7: Signalling Lymphocyte Activation
Molecule Family; SQ: subcutaneous; US: United States of America; VCD: Velcade-cyclophosphomidedexamethasone; VGPR: Very Good Partial Response; VMDex: Velcade-Melphalan-Dexamethasone; WM:
Waldenstrom’s Macroglobulinaemia

CONTACT Ashutosh D. Wechalekar
2PF, UK

a.wechalekar@ucl.ac.uk

National Amyloidosis Centre, UCL (Royal Free Campus), Rowland Hill Street, London, NW3

ß 2022 The Author(s). Published by Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group.
This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/),
which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited, and is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way.

2

A. D. WECHALEKAR ET AL.

Introduction
The current treatment paradigm for AL amyloidosis aims to
reduce the production of amyloidogenic immunoglobulin light
chain by suppressing the underlying plasma cell clone with a
view to reducing the availability of the toxic amyloid precursor
and to halting amyloid deposition, allowing for gradual tissue
regression of amyloid deposits leading to organ response and
improved survival. Disease staging using criteria for cardiac
staging based on Mayo clinic staging system (European modification of Mayo 2004 (stages I, II, IIIa and IIIb) [1] and Mayo
2012 update incorporating additional serum free light chains
(stage I-IV)) [2] as well as renal staging system from Palladini
and colleagues is crucial at baseline for risk stratification. The
depth of haematologic response is directly associated with outcomes in AL amyloidosis [3]. Therapy for AL amyloidosis has
been adopted from regimes studied in the treatment of multiple myeloma along with supportive measures to manage the
amyloid-related complications. Lately, prospective trials studying novel regimes in AL have been completed and are an area
of increasing interest to academia and industry. Daratumumab
with cyclophosphamide-bortezomib-dexamethasone became
the first formally licenced treatment for AL amyloidosis in
2021. The advantage of a particular cytotoxic treatment must
be balanced against the patient’s baseline organ function,
which can be significantly compromised because of amyloid
deposition. Standardised assessment of disease status is key to
inform treatment intensity and choice.
All patients with symptomatic systemic AL amyloidosis with
visceral organ involvement, significant soft tissue involvement,
coagulopathy or neuropathic involvement should be considered
for early treatment. The benefits of chemotherapy for patients
with a monoclonal gammopathy and isolated amyloid deposits
on a bone marrow biopsy or in the carpal tunnel in absence of
any other end organ involvement remain unclear but, due to a
very high risk of systemic progression, such patients need close

long-term follow up. Localised AL amyloidosis, affecting a single organ site in absence of any other systemic deposition
occurring often in the upper respiratory, urogenital and gastrointestinal tracts, the skin and the orbit, is a relatively indolent
disorder needing local (usually surgical) interventions and
chemotherapy is generally not indicated [4].

Methodology
The objective of this guideline is to provide healthcare professionals with clear guidance on the management and
investigation of patients with AL amyloidosis. A PubMed
search was conducted including clinical trials in AL amyloidosis and papers or reviews where AL amyloidosis was the
major focus. Relevant meeting abstracts were also included.
All papers were evaluated according to the GRADE criteria.
Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation are based
on the GRADE system (http://www.gradeworkinggroup.org).
Expert consensus was used were there were limited published data.
The draft guideline was reviewed and agreed by the members
of the writing group and approved by the board of the
International Society of Amyloidosis and European
Haematology Association Guidelines committee. The treatment
scenario is rapidly changing and these guidelines will be considered current until any publication of update/review or three
years from the date of current publication (whichever is earlier).
Goals of treatment, assessing and monitoring
treatment response
The international society of amyloidosis (ISA) has published
response criteria for AL amyloidosis [3] and there were
recently clarified [5] (Table 1). Multiple organ biopsies to
assess amyloid regression or progression have no significant

Table 1. Updated criteria for organ response and progression in AL amyloidosis [108–110].
Organ
Heart

Kidney

Response
NT-proBNP response (>30% and > 300ng/L decrease in
patients with baseline NT-proBNP  650 ng/L)
OR NYHA class response (2 class decrease in subjects
with baseline NYHA class 3 or 4)

Progression
NT-proBNP progression (>30% and > 300 ng/L increase)
OR
cTn progression (33% increase)
OR
Ejection fraction (EF) progression (10% decrease in EF)
25% worsening of estimated glomerular filtration rate

30% decrease of 24-hr urine protein or drop below 0.5 g/
day (urine protein must
be > 0.5 g/day pretreatment). Estimated glomerular
filtration rate must not worsen by 25% over baseline.
Liver
50% decrease in abnormal alkaline phosphatase value
50% increase of alkaline phosphatase above the
Decrease in liver size radiographically at least 2 cm
lowest value
Peripheral nervous system
Improvement in electromyogram nerve conduction
Progressive neuropathy by electromyography or nerve
velocity (rare)
conduction velocity
Definitions for Haematologic response in AL amyloidosis
Response categories
Definitions
Complete response
Both criteria must be met:
 Absence of amyloidogenic light chains (either free and/or as part of a complete immunoglobulin) defined by negative
immunofixation electrophoresis of both serum and urine
 Either a FLC ratio within the reference range or the uninvolved FLC concentration is greater than involved FLC
concentration with or without an abnormal FLC ratio
Very good partial response
dFLC concentration < 40 mg/L
Partial response
dFLC decrease > 50% compared to baseline
No response
All other patients

NT-proBNP: N-terminal pro-Brain Natriuretic Peptide; NYHA: New York Heart Classification; FLC: free light chain ratio; dFLC: difference between the involved and
uninvolved light chains; cTn: cardiac troponin T; EF: ejection fraction.

AMYLOID

value, are frequently misleading and potentially dangerous.
Response in AL amyloidosis involves assessment of the direct
impact of chemotherapy on the clone and, an indirect effect of
improvement in organ function based on the a priori organ
damage (an “organ response”) as well as depth of haematologic response achieved. Although the deeper the haematologic
response, the greater is the likelihood of organ responses, there
may be a discrepancy between the haematologic response and
organ response. The present criteria define organ response in a
binary fashion (response/no response). Efforts are ongoing to
develop a composite response model which not only grades
the extent of the organ response but also incorporates the
haematologic response.
Whilst organ response is the goal of treatment and, since
none of available agents can influence this directly, achieving a very good partial haematologic response (VGPR) was
considered as the “goal” of treatment in AL amyloidosis.
However, the ISA criteria clearly show that a complete
response (CR) is associated with superior outcomes [3] and,
lately, single centre studies shown that reaching very low
free light chain levels after treatment (difference between
involved and uninvolved light chains (dFLC) or involved
free light chain (iFLC)) is also predictive of better outcomes
[6–9]. These guidelines would suggest achieving a complete
haematologic response is the goal of treatment in AL amyloidosis, ideally associated with iFLC < 20 mg/L or dFLC
<10 mg/L. Haematologic response should be evaluated at
least monthly (more frequently in advanced patients) and
treatment modification is considered early if the patient
does achieve progressive FLC response within the initial
cycles (if the response following 2 cycles if  partial response
(PR) or following 3 cycles < VGPR and no organ response
has occurred) [10]. An algorithm to help treatment modification based on depth of response has been published [11].
There is mounting evidence indicating that undetectable
minimal residual disease (MRD) is associated with higher
rates of organ responses and significant reduction of the
risk of haematologic relapse [12,13]. However, this endpoint
has not been evaluated prospectively and, as yet, cannot be
proposed as the goal of therapy in all patients; no recommendations can be made on optimal timing of assessment,
optimal evaluation method and clinical decision making
based on detection of MRD.
Recommendations on goals of clone directed treatments
in AL amyloidosis:
 Goal of treatment is to achieve a complete haematologic
response (Grade B, Level IIb) with iFLC <20 mg/L or
dFLC <10 mg/L (Grade B; Level III)
 Patients achieving less than a very good partial response
by cycle 3 or less than a partial response by cycle 2 should
be considered for treatment modification (Grade C;
Level IV)

Supportive care
A multidisciplinary approach to management is crucial with
involvement from cardiologists, nephrologists, neurologists,

3

gastroenterologists (depending on the type/extent of organ
involvement) in addition to the treating haematologists [14].
Stringent supportive therapy is critical to survival of
patients. In cases with renal or cardiac involvement, the key
element is meticulous fluid balance. It is important to avoid
commonly used drugs for heart failure (like ACE inhibitors,
beta blockers or calcium channel blockers) which may worsen symptoms [15]. Patients presenting with severe nephrotic syndrome can have substantial urinary loss of proteins,
such as albumin (edema and intravascular volume depletion), immunoglobulins (increasing risk of infections), loss
of antithrombin-III and activation of coagulation factors
(increased risk of thrombosis) – each needing specific clinical review and intervention if appropriate. Proactive identification and management of cardiac arrhythmias as well as
judicious but early use of anticoagulants in patients with
atrial fibrillation, poor atrial function as well as those with
severe nephrotic syndrome, are important. Patient education
in monitoring blood pressure and fluid status can help.
There are limited data on use of supportive care measures
in AL amyloidosis [14] and these recommendations are
based on expert consensus opinion.

Treatment of newly diagnosed patients with AL
amyloidosis
Treatment of AL amyloidosis is risk adapted. The choice of
regime, agent and intensity is dictated by the degree of
organ involvement, the performance status, age, and bone
marrow findings. The primary decision is whether a patient
is a candidate for an autologous stem cell transplant (ASCT)
as part of the upfront therapy, or combination chemotherapy without ASCT. The ISA ASCT guidelines discuss the
criteria for stem cell transplantation in detail [16]. Apart
from the patients fulfilling the criteria outlined in the ISAASCT guidelines (and briefly below), all other patients are
treated with chemotherapy-based approaches. With increasing effectiveness of chemotherapy regimens, especially incorporating daratumumab upfront, the current role of ASCT in
newly diagnosed AL remains to be clarified. However, in
patients with AL amyloidosis with underlying symptomatic
myeloma, and in patients with IgM-AL amyloidosis, ASCT
remains an important part of first line therapy.

Selection of candidates for ASCT (refer for details to
the ISA ASCT guideline [16])
The eligibility criteria for ASCT varies from centre to centre.
Only 20% of newly diagnosed patients are eligible to
receive this intensive form of treatment. Selection criteria
for treatment with ASCT have required a confirmed tissue
diagnosis of AL amyloidosis with end organ damage, age
18–70 years, and minimum measures of performance status
(Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) 0–2), cardiac function (left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF)
>40%), pulmonary function (O2 saturation >95% on room
air, diffusing capacity of the lungs for carbon monoxide
(DLCO) > 50% of predicted, absence of medically refractory

4

A. D. WECHALEKAR ET AL.

pleural effusions), hepatic function (direct bilirubin <2 mg/
dL), renal function (estimated glomerular filtration rate
(eGFR) >30 ml/min/1.73m2) and hemodynamic stability
(baseline supine systolic blood pressure >90 mm Hg).
Patients on haemodialysis or peritoneal dialysis for renal
failure are not excluded if other eligibility criteria are met.
Cardiac biomarker staging system can also define risk of
treatment-related complications while undergoing ASCT.
Elevated cardiac troponin T levels (>0.06 ng/ml) and Nterminal fragment of pro-brain natriuretic peptide
(NTproBNP) (>5000 pg/mL; in practice, a lower NTproBNP threshold may be considered) are associated with
poor survival while undergoing ASCT.

Non-transplant approaches
Alkylating agents
Melphalan and cyclophosphamide (plus corticosteroids) are
active against plasma cell clones and are mostly used as part
of triplet combinations with newer agents. Melphalan plus
dexamethasone (MDex) is a relatively safe therapy for transplant-ineligible patients with haematologic response rates up
to 76% [17], but is less effective than when combined with
bortezomib (BMDex) [18]. Use of oral melphalan and dexamethasone without incorporation of novel agents is now
considered suboptimal in majority of patients.
Proteasome inhibitors (PIs)
Clonal plasma cells in AL amyloidosis are particularly sensitive to PIs because of their dependence on proteasome
integrity to cope with the proteotoxic stress caused by the
misfolded light chains [19]. Targeting the proteasome has
been a highly effective strategy in AL amyloidosis.
Bortezomib, either as single agent [20], with dexamethasone
[21,22] or as part of a triplet, is highly active. It is administered subcutaneously, usually once weekly, combined with
dexamethasone and an alkylating agent. Bortezomib-containing regimens are considered as the primary therapy for
AL amyloidosis in most centres in Europe, the US and
Asia-Pacific.
Bortezomib-Cyclophosphamide-Dexamethasone (VCD or
CyBorD) is most commonly used regimen and a weekly
bortezomib protocol is preferred (there is no specific need
for weeks’ treatment break each cycle (“off week”))
[6,23–27]. Overall hematological response rates with VCD/
CyBorD range between 60% and 65%, with CRs in the range
of 18–25% in the larger series [6,23]. This regimen is moderately well tolerated, does not cause significant myelosuppression, may be administered with cyclophosphamide
orally or intravenous (IV) and does not require dose adjustments for renal impairment. There is a suggestion that
VCD/CyBorD may be less effective in patients harbouring a
plasma cell clone with chromosomal translocation
t(11;14) [28,29].
Bortezomib combined with oral melphalan and dexamethasone (BMDex) was compared to MDex in a

prospective randomised study in newly diagnosed transplant ineligible patients with disease Mayo stage I–IIIA
[18]. BMDex treated patients achieved an 81% hematological response rate at 3 months compared to 57% in the
MDex arm. This is the only therapy in AL amyloidosis
that has shown a survival improvement, mainly in
patients with a mild cardiac disease (Mayo Clinic stage
II) in a prospective randomised study with contemporary
regimens. Retrospective data suggest that BMDex may be
able to overcome the disadvantage of bortezomib in
patients harbouring t(11;14) but further validation is
needed for recommending this [28,29]. The melphalan
dose needs renal adjustment, myelotoxicity may be more
pronounced than with cyclophosphamide and late effects
such as myelodysplastic syndromes can occur. Neuropathy
is the primary and limiting toxicity of bortezomib. A signal of cardiotoxicity may also exist with bortezomib; atrial
arrhythmias may be more frequent with intravenous (IV)
administration than with subcutaneous (SQ) bortezomib
[30]. Bortezomib needs to be used with caution in
patients with significant lung disease due to a small risk
of pulmonary toxicity [31].
Ixazomib is a second-generation PI, with oral administration and lower neurotoxicity compared to bortezomib. A
phase III randomised study evaluated Ixazomib with dexamethasone vs physician choice in patients with relapsed AL
amyloidosis. Although the first primary endpoint of overall
haematologic
response
rate
was
not
met,
Ixazomib–dexamethasone prolonged time to vital organ
deterioration and mortality, progression free survival (PFS)
and time to subsequent therapy vs physician’s choice [32].
In a small phase I/II study, Ixazomib combined with cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone (ICd) was safe and well
tolerated in newly diagnosed AL amyloidosis patients and
induced  VGPR in 39% [33]. In a phase 2 study from
Mayo Clinic, ICd followed by ixazomib maintenance was
given in 35 patients. After a median of 4 cycles, overall
haematologic response was 57%, including CR in 14% and
VGPR in 26%; however, the most common reason to move
off study was institution of alternate therapy in 63% of
patients [34]. In small study from China [35], 25 newly
diagnosed patients received ixazomib 4 mg with low-dose
(10 mg) dexamethasone; after a median of 4 cycles of therapy, 70.8% achieved a haematologic response, including 43%
CR and 21% VGPR. Most common severe toxicities
included thrombocytopenia and diarrhoea.
Carfilzomib is an irreversible second-generation PI which
has shown improved efficacy compared to bortezomib in
relapsed/refractory but not in newly diagnosed, transplant
ineligible patients with myeloma. The known cardiovascular
and renal toxicity of carfilzomib limits its use in patients
with AL amyloidosis when other options are available. In a
small series (N ¼ 5) carfilzomib was safe and active in newly
diagnosed patients with peripheral neuropathy [36]. A prospective phase 1 study has reported on safety of carfilzomibthalidomide-dexamethasone in relapsed AL amyloidosis [37].

AMYLOID

Immunomodulatory agents (IMiDs)
IMiD’s are useful in treatment of AL amyloidosis and form
an important part of the therapeutic armamentarium.
However, clonal responses to IMiDs tend to be slow in
most patients with AL amyloidosis. Thalidomide is associated with significant neurological and GI toxicity, low doses
are used and is no longer widely prescribed [38].
Lenalidomide is poorly tolerated at the full 25 mg daily dose
in AL amyloidosis and all patients should start with significant dose reduction (escalation based on tolerance). When
combined with MDex or cyclophosphamide/dexamethasone
in previously untreated patients, at doses of 15 mg daily or
lower, haematologic response rates of 46–60% are seen but
with low CR rates [39–41]. Common lenalidomide-associated toxicities in patients with AL amyloidosis, include skin
rashes, thrombotic complications, infections, fatigue and
deterioration of renal function. Pomalidomide has a safer
renal profile and is, perhaps, better tolerability in patients
with AL amyloidosis compared to lenalidomide; studies in
the first line are eagerly awaited [42,43]. Use of IMiDs is
associated with an increase in NT-proBNP, which often is
transient, but can make assessment of cardiac response challenging task. The upfront combination of bortezomib and
low dose lenalidomide was reported in a small study with
high haematologic response rates (89% on intent to treat,
including CR in 32% and VGPR in 57%), however, toxicity
was also significant [41]. A similar combination with pomalidomide, bortezomib and dexamethasone in newly diagnosed patients was also associated with toxicity and early
mortality (but unclear if disease or treatment related) [44].
Monoclonal antibodies
Daratumumab is an anti-CD38 monoclonal antibody, with
substantial single activity in patients with relapsed/refractory
AL amyloidosis [45–47], and in combination with bortezomib-based therapy in newly diagnosed patients.
In the phase III ANDROMEDA study, subcutaneous daratumumab plus VCD was compared to 6 cycles of standard
VCD in newly diagnosed stage I–IIIA patients; daratumumab continued for up to 18 months in the dara-VCD arm,
after the completion of initial 6 cycles [48]. DaratumumabVCD combination improved CR rates (the primary end
point of the study) to 53% vs. 18% for VCD. Overall haematologic response rates were also significantly higher (92%
vs 77%), as well as  VGPR rates (79% vs 49%); with similar
findings in patients with t(11;14) and those with cardiac
stage III disease (although the study was not powered for
these end points). At 6 months, organ response rates were
also higher in the daratumumab-VCD arm (cardiac: 42% vs
22%; renal: 53% vs 24%) which improved at 18 months in
the daratumumab-VCD arm to 53% and 58% respectively
with no change in the control arm [49]. Early mortality was
similar between groups and long term survival outcomes
have not yet been evaluated. A study specific end-point
(Major Organ Deterioration-progression free survival
(MOD-PFS)), defined as a composite of cardiac or renal
failure, haematologic progression or death, was improved in

5

the daratumumab-VCD arm, driven primarily by the lower
rates of haematologic progressions, at this stage of follow
up. Regarding the toxicity of this new combination, there
was an increase in infection rates but no clear signal of cardiac toxicity was observed.

Treatment choice
For patients who are ineligible for high dose therapy (see
the high dose therapy guideline) and no available option of a
clinical trial, a combination of daratumumab-VCD is the
preferred regimen, if daratumumab is available. If daratumumab is not available, then a bortezomib-based triplet
combination, either VCD or BMDex, are primary options.
BMDex and VCD have not been compared prospectively
limiting evidence-based recommendations. By expert consensus, VCD is the preferred regimen in most patients
because it is easy to administer on an outpatient basis, with
either oral or IV cyclophosphamide; may be preferable in
patients with moderate or severe reduction of eGFR and/or
heavy hypoalbuminemia and in those with potentially
reversible contraindications to stem cell transplant. BMDex
may have a role in selected patients where ASCT is unlikely
to be an option at presentation or later in the disease.
Melphalan needs dose adjustment when eGFR is below
30 ml/mi/1.73 m2. Bortezomib and dexamethasone doses
need to be adapted to cardiac stage, presence of autonomic/
peripheral neuropathy, fluid retention status and patient’s
functional status.
Optimal duration of therapy has not been evaluated formally. Expert consensus suggests treatment is given for at
least two cycles beyond best response. For patients with at
least VGPR after 3 cycles, depending on the treatment tolerance, it is reasonable to continue for a total of 6–8 treatment cycles as depth of response can improve.
Recommendations for upfront treatment:
Patients without significant neuropathy:
 Cardiac Stage I-IIIa: Dara-CyBorD (preferred)(Grade A;
Level 1a); alternative CyBorD (Grade B; Level IIa) or
VMDex (Grade A; Level 1a)
 Cardiac Stage IIIb: Dose modified Dara-CyBorD (Grade
C; Level IV) or single agent daratumumab (Grade B;
Level III); alternative dose modified CyBorD or VMDex
(Grade C; Level IV)
Maintenance therapy
There is limited data on maintenance therapy in AL amyloidosis. In the ANDROMEDA study, patients treated with
Daratumumab-VCD received monthly daratumumab for up
to 24 cycles from start of therapy (18 months maintenance);
however, patients were not randomised to receive maintenance or not and the data from this part of the study are not
available yet. Patients who have amyloidosis on background
of symptomatic myeloma are likely to benefit from the use
of maintenance therapy as per the recommendations for
multiple myeloma. For all other patients with AL

6

A. D. WECHALEKAR ET AL.

amyloidosis, however, no recommendation can be made
given the lack of data but there may be a role in those with
persistent clonal disease (less than CR or CR with persistent
MRD) and persistent organ dysfunction.
Recommendation:
 Routine maintenance
Level IV).

not recommended

(Grade C;

Consolidation therapy
For eligible patients’ high dose melphalan may be used as
consolidation after less than a complete response to chemotherapy, considering that complete responses are often very
long lasting in AL amyloidosis and that high dose melphalan only obtains 16% of complete response in patients
refractory to induction treatment; however, in non-ASCT
eligible patients, there is limited data regarding the role of
consolidation. In a small series in patients with AL (N ¼ 19)
or light chain deposition disease (LCDD) (N ¼ 6) who had
not achieved a CR after standard bortezomib-based therapy,
consolidation with a short course of daratumumab (4 doses,
one month) improved response to CR in 8 (32%) patients,
including 5 (20%) patients that became also MRD negative
[50]. The role of consolidation treatment with an alternative
chemotherapy regime in those achieving a VGPR but not a
CR has not been studied. However, the availability of effective low toxicity treatment like daratumumab is changing the
treatment paradigm in AL amyloidosis, with the more frequent search for a complete haematologic response. In those
patients with no organ response or organ progression despite reaching a VGPR or CR with persistent MRD, there
may be a role for further treatment to improve the depth
of response.
Recommendation:
 Routine consolidation not recommended (Grade C;
Level IV)
 Consolidation treatment may be considered patients with
VGPR or CR with persistent MRD and no organ response
(Grade C; Level IV)

Special populations

and deep haematologic responses and encouraging improvement in survival [52]. Intravenous daratumumab may be
given in divided doses to reduce fluid volume but the subcutaneous formulation is preferred. Close monitoring is
needed and inpatient treatment administration is advised.
The advantage of initiating treatment with continuous cardiac monitoring is unclear. Addition of a third agent to bortezomib-dexamethasone may accelerate haematologic
response: cyclophosphamide and melphalan are usually well
tolerated and daratumumab is, again, preferred. IMiDs are
associated with significant toxicity in these patients and
should be avoided unless there are contraindications to bortezomib and no access to daratumumab.
Recommendations:
 Dose modified Dara-CyBorD (Grade C; Level IV) or single
agent daratumumab (Grade B; Level III); alternative dose
modified CyBorD or VMDex (Grade C; Level IV)
Patients with neuropathy
Dose reduced bortezomib-based therapy may be used for
patients presenting with mild neuropathy. Daratumumab in
addition to bortezomib or as single agent is preferred, if
available. For patients with severe neuropathy, bortezomib
should be avoided as first option and other treatments such
as MDex, lenalidomide-based regimes, cautious once weekly
carfilzomib-dexamethasone in the absence of advanced cardiac disease or daratumumab-based regimens should be
considered, depending on the availability of these agents.
The role of Ixazomib in patients with neuropathy remains
to be clarified but can be cautiously considered in selected
cases. In absence of other options in patients not achieving
a haematologic response, cautious bortezomib may be given,
with close monitoring of the neuropathy.
Recommendation:
 Single
agent
daratumumab
or
LenalidomideDexamethasone or oral melphalan-dexamethasone or
Carfilzomib-Dex or Venetoclax are all possible options
(Grade C; Level IV)
 Single agent daratumumab is the preferred option (Grade
C; Level IV)

Stage IIIB patients
Anti-clonal therapy alone may not suffice for such patients,
even when haematologic response is rapid, as early mortality
may be as high as 50% following therapy initiation [1].
Close collaboration with the heart failure clinic is mandatory, and cardiac transplantation should be discussed for
younger patients, especially those with isolated cardiac
involvement. Immediate treatment initiation is crucial. Dose
modification of bortezomib and/or dexamethasone or
sequential introduction of drugs should be considered as
appropriate [51]. Daratumumab, if available, is proposed as
the preferred option, even starting as single agent;preliminary data of an ongoing European phase II trial show early

Patients with bleeding
Standard therapy should be used for these patients with
careful monitoring to avoid thrombocytopenia, which could
increase the risk of major, clinically significant bleeding.
Replacement with clotting factor concentrates, as indicated,
may be considered. In patients with factor X deficiency and
life-threatening bleeding, activated factor VIIa may have
role. IMiDs need careful assesement in patients at high
bleeding risk due to complexity of balancing risks of bleeding vs. clotting and challenge in use of thromboprophylaxis.
The anti-fibrinolytic agent, tranexamic acid, may be used to
help decrease the rate of bleeding if there is no

AMYLOID

prothrombotic risk factors (like severe nephrotic syndrome
or history of ischaemic heart disease or stroke).
Patients with advanced liver dysfunction
Patients presenting with high bilirubin have a particularly
poor prognosis in the absence of deep haematologic
response, and are challenging to manage since many drugs
that undergo hepatic metabolism needing substantial dose
adjustments. Dose modification for bortezomib in liver dysfunction remains poorly studied. Conversely, cases of bortezomib-induced liver toxicity have been reported, but is not
considered as a hepatotoxic drug; close monitoring is
advised. Cyclophosphamide is metabolised and activated in
the liver but its metabolites can also cause liver toxicity.
Daratumumab has not been tested in patients with liver dysfunction and there is limited data on potential liver toxicity
although it is considered as an unlikely cause of clinically
apparent liver injury. Lenalidomide has been associated with
rare cases of severe hepatotoxicity although mild transaminitis is not uncommon. Daratumumab with steroids may be
preferred given the low potential for hepatotoxicity but
there is limited data.
Patients requiring dialysis
Being on dialysis is per se not an indication for a specific
regime choice but all drugs used require renal dose modification. Bortezomib generally does not need dose adjustment
but it should administered after dialysis. Standard VCD has
been used for several years in the management of patients
with acute or chronic renal failure due to plasma cell disorders, either myeloma or AL amyloidosis or other monoclonal gammopathy related diseases. Melphalan requires dose
adjustments and may be associated with unpredictable
haematologic toxicity in patients with severe renal dysfunction. Among IMiDs, only lenalidomide requires dose modifications according to eGFR/CrCl; these are not necessary
for pomalidomide or thalidomide. Daratumumab can be
safely administered in patients with severe renal dysfunction
or those undergoing dialysis, based on retrospective data
from patients with AL amyloidosis or prospective data from
myeloma patients. Retrospective data in relapsed/refractory
AL have suggested that in patients with heavy proteinuria
daratumumab may be less effective due to loss in urine [53]
and this may also be a problem with other monoclonal
antibody-based treatments in AL. PK data from the
ANDROMEDA cohort suggests daratumumab kinetics were
similar to that seen in multiple myeloma although specific
analysis in patients with heavy proteinuria is not available
[54]. When used intravenously, it may should be administered in a smaller fluid volume.
IgM related amyloidosis
In most of these cases, a B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma
(NHL) and not a plasma cell is the culprit clone. Often lymphoplasmacytic clones are present but the type of

7

monoclonal cells in the bone marrow should be carefully
assessed as a study in 70 patients with IgM amyloidosis
showing that 16 (23%) had pure plasma cell neoplasm with
a t(11;14) in 60% of cases whilst most of the patients with a
lymphoplasmacytoid clone had MYD-88 mutations (presence of which may help the distinction) [55]. Regimens
designed for NHL/Waldenstr€
om’s macroglobulinaemia
(WM), targeting mature B-cells, are preferred for those with
a lymphoplasmacytic neoplasm. Rituximab-based regimens
are the mainstay of therapy, based mostly in the experience
from treatment of WM. Rituximab with bendamustine has
been used extensively in IgM-AL [56,57]. Combinations
with rituximab and bortezomib (such as bortezomib with
DRC or BDR [58–60]) may be another options, but these
have not been compared prospectively. Responses to
Ibrutinib appear modest. It may be considered as a treatment in selected patients without other treatment options
for an underlying lymphoplasmacytic or small lymphocytic
clone; however, limited experience in AL amyloidosis suggested that there may be potential cardiotoxicity of this
drug and it appears to be poorly tolerated [61]. The retrospective analysis of 38 patients treated with ASCT showed a
deep haematologic response (VGPR) in 76% of patients
with renal and cardiac responses in 65% and 60% of
patients, respectively. Treatment-related mortality was 5%
[62]. IgM-related amyloidosis is considered one of the indications for ASCT due to poor responses with standard treatments and limited treatment options (compared to non-IgM
AL amyloidosis) at relapse. There is limited data on conditioning regimens for ASCT but consideration to using
BEAM (BCNU, Etoposide, Cytarabine, Melphalan) in
younger fitter patients with lymphoplasmacytoid clones may
be beneficial.
Recommendation:
 Preferred treatment: Rituximab-Bendamustine (Grade B;
Level IIb) or ASCT (Grade B, Level IIb)
 Alternatives: Rituximab-bortezomib-Dex or RituximabCyclo-Dex or CyBorD or Ibrutinib(±Ritux) (Level C;
Grade IV)

Treatment of relapsed disease
Most patients with AL amyloidosis will relapse after initial
first line treatment and ISA has defined relapse criteria in
AL amyloidosis. However, these were defined when risks of
progression and light chain proteotoxicity were less well
understood. Patients often relapse slowly with progressive
light chain increase which may or may not be associated
with worsening end organ dysfunction at the onset of
relapse. The Mayo clinic group showed that patients with
relapse and end organ dysfunction have poorer outcomes
than those treated just for serological progression [63].
Palladini et al. put forward the concept of patients with
“high-risk dFLC progression” [64] which was defined as a
dFLC of >20 mg/L, a level >20% of baseline value, and a
>50% increase from the value reached at best response and
is conceptually attractive. However, both arguments for

8

A. D. WECHALEKAR ET AL.

advocating early therapy at clonal relapse to prevent organ
progression [65] and cautioning against over-enthusiastic
resumption of chemotherapy in frail patients at the first
sign of clonal relapse [66] are both valid in this patient
population. Formal studies for the threshold iFLC/dFLC levels for re-starting chemotherapy remain limited. Thus, it is
reasonable to consider therapy when the dFLC has reached
50% of the diagnostic level in a patient with limited vital
organ involvement but most patients who present with significant end organ dysfunction (cardiac, renal or autonomic), application of the “high-risk” dFLC-progression is
more appropriate. In patients with initial severe cardiac disease, relapse treatment should be rapidly initiated in case of
haematologic relapse from complete response.
There are many potential options available for treatment
of relapse systemic AL amyloidosis; proteasome inhibitors
(PI), monoclonal antibodies (mAb), immunomodulatory
therapy (IMIDs), venetoclax, bendamustine, and high dose
melphalan with autologous stem cell transplantation
(ASCT). The options of patient relapsing or progressing on
D-VCD remain unclear. Whilst it is not possible to be prescriptive regarding the optimal sequencing of therapies, the
two guiding principles are the depth and duration of initial
response, use of a class of agents not previously exposed as
well as the limitation imposed by patients’ fitness/frailty and
end organ damage. For example, prolonged response with
bortezomib based regime (with no neuropathy) would
encourage re-treatment with a PI, ideally with a different
partner for combination. In patients without prior daratumumab exposure, daratumumab based regime may be favoured. Enrolment in clinical trials is encouraged.
Proteasome inhibitors in relapsed AL
Ixazomib
Ixazomib may be useful agent at relapse as demonstrated by
the phase 3 TOURMALINE-AL1 study. Although the study
did not reach its primary end point, haematologic overall
response rate (ORR) was 63% for Ixa-Dex in PI-naïve
patients, and 41% in PI-exposed patients. Patients stayed on
therapy substantially longer in the Ixa-dex arm compared to
physician’s choice [32]. It is also tolerated in combination
with lenalidomide and dexamethasone (IRD) with median
PFS of 17.0 months (95% CI 7.3–20.7 months), improving to
28.8 months (95% CI 20.6–37.0 months) in those achieving
CR/VGPR [67]. The weekly oral nature of this treatment is
very convenient, and the agent is well tolerated, with minimal neuropathy.
Carfilzomib
There is limited data on carfilzomib. Small studies have
demonstrated efficacy. Cohen et al. reported their Phase I/II
trial of carfilzomib in 28 patients with relapsed/refractory
Mayo cardiac stage I or II disease. The 20/36 mg/m2
biweekly dosing was determined as the maximum tolerated
dose (MTD). While the haematologic response rate of 63%
is comparable to most other therapies for relapsed/refractory

disease, the CR was low at 11%. 20 patients experienced
Grade III/IV toxicity (according to Common Terminology
Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v5.0), many cardiac or
pulmonary. It has also been reported to be useful with a
once weekly schedule in combination with thalidomide and
dexamethasone in a phase 1 study [37] with no substantial
grade III/IV toxicity and good responses. Overall, there are
significant safety concerns with carfilzomib, especially cardiac and renal disease, caution dosing and close monitoring
is advised. It may have a role in patients with neuropathic
presentation and should be used with once weekly protocol.
Anti-CD38 monoclonal antibodies in relapsed AL
Daratumumab
A number of retrospective and prospective studies have
reported high response rates and excellent tolerance for daratumumab in patients with relapsed AL amyloidosis [68,69].
A prospective Phase 2 trial of 40 relapsed/refractory patients
receiving daratumumab monotherapy demonstrated haematologic response rate of 59% with VGPR or greater in 44%,
typically reached within one cycle [46]. Daratumumab was
well tolerated, with no unexpected adverse events, with
infection and atrial fibrillation the most commonly report
toxicities. The duration of treatment remains to be clearly
established. A small retrospective study suggested good
responses with daratumumab in combination with lenalidomide and dexamethasone [70].
Isatuximab
Preliminary results of a Phase II study of isatuximab for
relapsed disease reported overall haematologic response rate
was 77%, with a low CR rate of 3%, but VGPR was 54%,
and partial response seen in 20% in 25 patients. The most
common reasons for discontinuation were adverse events
in 26%.
Immunomodulatory agents in relapse AL
Thalidomide, lenalidomide and pomalidomide have been all
been reported in relapsed patients with AL amyloidosis [71].
However, there are no phase III trials in this setting.
Thalidomide has significant toxicities and can no longer be
considered as an optimal agent for treatment of relapsed
AL, unless used due to resource constraints. All IMiD’s have
a potential to increase NT-proBNP and may worsen renal
function [72] – both require close monitoring.
Lenalidomide
Lenalidomide is less well tolerated in AL amyloidosis than
in myeloma. A daily lenalidomide dose of 15 mg has been
established as the MTD in a phase I/II dose escalation study
[73]. Using this lower dose, haematologic response rates
around 60% have been reported when combined with cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone [74,75] although the CR
rate has remained disappointingly low. Median time to
haematologic response is 3 months. Lenalidomide does not

AMYLOID

appear to induce or exacerbate neuropathy in most AL
patients, thus lenalidomide-based regimens can be considered for patients with amyloid neuropathy. Like all IMIDs,
lenalidomide increases BNP and NT-proBNP levels. This is
independent of changes in renal function and FLC causing
interference with the assessment of cardiac response.
Pomalidomide
This third-generation immunomodulatory agent has been
tested in AL amyloidosis over the last decade [43,76,77],
showing in combination with weekly dexamethasone in previously treated patients, a HR rate of 48% with organ
responses in 5/33 patients. The most common adverse
effects were fatigue and neutropenia. The maximum tolerated dose was confirmed as 4 mg daily (same as the recommended dose in myeloma). A recent real-world analysis of
153 relapsed patient treated with pomalidomide-dexamethasone showed, at the completion of cycle 6, 68 (44%) patients
obtained at least partial haematologic response, with 5 complete responses (CR, 3%), 35 very good partial responses
(VGPR, 23%) [42].
Bendamustine
Two studies of bendamustine with dexamethasone have suggested good clonal response rates in heavily pre-treated
patients, but the significant haematologic toxicity observed
prevents routine use of this agent [78]. Its major role
remains in patients with IgM related AL amyloidosis.
Recommendation for treatment of relapsed disease:
Proteasome inhibitor Naïve or prolonged response to 1st
line PI:
 CyBorD/VMDex B (Level B; Grade III); Ixazomib-Dex
(Grade A; Level Ib); Dara-V(C)D (Level C; Grade IV)
Proteasome inhibitor exposed Daratumumab Naïve:
 Single agent daratumumab (Level B; Grade IIb), DaraV(C)D (Level C; Grade IV), Dara-RD (Level B; Grade
III), Isatuximab (Level C; Grade IV)
Proteasome inhibitor exposed IMiD Naïve:
 Lenalidomide-Dexamethasone (±cyclophosphamide) (Level
B; Grade IIa), Ixazomib-Lenalidomide dexamethasone
(Grade B; Level IIb)
Lenalidomide Refractory:
 Pomalidomide-Dexamethasone (Level B; Grade IIa),
Bendamustine (Level B; Grade IIa)
Novel anti—plasma cell agents on horizon/off label use
A number of novel anti-plasma cell approaches studies in
myeloma are on the horizon for patients with AL
amyloidosis.

9

BCL2 (B-cell lymphoma 2 gene) inhibitors
Patients with t(11;14) translocation, a finding noted in
approximately 50% of patients with AL amyloidosis, have a
dependence of plasma cells on the constitutive activation of
the cellular processes related to cyclin D1 activation [79].
The resultant BCL-2 inhibition with this agent removes the
anti-apoptotic protective mechanisms leading to preferential
killing of affected cells. Agents targeting BCL2 pathway are,
hence, of interest in this disease. Venetoclax is the best
studied agent and experience in multiple myeloma suggests
that this agent has significant activity in patients with the
myeloma having t(11;14) translocation [80]. Based on clinical trial data in multiple myeloma, this compound has single agent activity but also works in combination with
bortezomib and daratumumab; both being important agents
in the present management of AL amyloidosis. Retrospective
data on the use of Venetoclax in AL amyloid suggests
responses are notably deep and durable; and it is well tolerated even in frail patients [81]. There is no prospective data
on venetoclax dosing in AL amyloidosis; hence, starting at a
low dose and increasing cautiously based on tolerance is
important. Prospective data specifically in the AL amyloidosis population is awaited but if the early experience with
this agent holds true, it would become a very useful tool in
addressing the highly prevalent population of AL amyloidosis patients with the t(11;14) abnormality known to have a
sub-optimal response to proteasome inhibitors.
Recommendation
for
patients
with
t(11;14)
translocation:
 Venetoclax (Grade B; Level III); Venetoclax-BortezomibDexamethasone (Grade C; Level III), Melphalan
Dexamethasone (Grade C; Level IV)

BCMA targeting agents
The B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA) is another cell surface molecule ubiquitously expressed on plasma cell as well
as their B-cell progenitors. There have been several unique
targeting strategies demonstrating clear anti-plasma cell
activity in multiple myeloma [82]. To date, however, the
experience specifically in AL amyloidosis is limited. A novel
antibody-drug conjugate, Belantamab mafodotin, combines
the potent mafodotin toxin with plasma cell targeting antiBCMA monoclonal antibody [83]. It has demonstrated
excellent single agent activity in advanced relapsed and
refractory multiple myeloma. Combination studies with
various immunomodulating agents and proteasome inhibitors are ongoing. A prospective EMN study (NCT04617925)
is examining Belantamab in relapsed AL amyloidosis. An
important consideration with this agent is the unique ocular
toxicity in the form of keratopathy which has proven to be
a challenge in the delivery of this agent. In AL amyloidosis,
with the often-lower clonal burden, less frequent and finite
dosing strategies built around response adapted approaches
may help limit this issue without compromising efficacy.

10

A. D. WECHALEKAR ET AL.

BCMA has also proven to be an excellent target for chimeric antigen receptor T-cells (CART) and bispecific T-cell
engagers (BiTE). There are now numerous products in both
these classes with demonstrable anti-plasma cell activity but
trials exploring their use in AL amyloid are lacking. The
advantages to their use in AL amyloidosis are likely to be the
low plasma cell burden with a potential for very deep/durable
responses but challenges of cytokine release syndrome (CRS)
remain to be overcome in this fragile population.
An additional anti-plasma cell target is CS-1 (SLAMF7).
In vitro data has suggested that this may be an optimal target particularly in AL amyloidosis as it may be more heavily
expressed on the plasma cells giving rise to this disorder
[84]. The monoclonal antibody Elotuzumab is being studied
specifically in AL amyloidosis. Building on success in multiple myeloma and some notable small case series in
AL amyloidosis [85], a prospective phase II study examining
elotuzumab, lenalidomide, dexamethasone ± cyclophosphamide is underway (NCT03252600). CS-1 may also prove to
be a useful target for CART development in this disease.
Pre-clinical data in mice with anti-CS1 directed CART cells
has demonstrated this proof of concept but studies in
humans are lacking [84]. Again, the potential for deep and
durable responses certainly justifies further exploration.
Recommendation:
 Belantamab Mafodotin (Grade B; Level III)
 CAR-T cell or Bispecific antibodies are not recommended
outside of clinical trials

Treatment of localised AL amyloidosis
Localised light chain amyloidosis (locAL) is a rare and heterogeneous disease characterised by the local deposition of
amyloidogenic light chains produced by a local B-cell or
plasma cell clone but more often has the presenting characteristics of a marginal zone lymphoma [86–88]. The most
common involved sites are the airways (larynx, trachea and
bronchi) and the lung, the urinary tract, skin and gastrointestinal tract [4,89,90]. These patients do not progress to
systemic AL amyloidosis and do not require repeated extensive systemic investigations. Organ involvement may present
as a single amyloid lesion (amyloidoma) or multiple localizations across all the anatomical site. LocAL is often
asymptomatic and diagnosis can be incidental, especially in
the lung [90]. Even if symptoms depend mostly on the site
of localisation, clinical presentation can be complicated by
the presence of other entities particularly frequent in: autoimmune disorders (especially Sjogren syndrome) [91],
monoclonal gammopathy of undetermined significance and
lymphoproliferative disorders [92–94].
Since localised AL per se does not impact survival
(patients survival is similar to general population) [4], treatment is only required for symptomatic disease. Treatment is
generally proposed in more than 50–70% of patients and is
effective in 50–80% of cases, depending on organ localisation [89]. Surgical removal of amyloidosis is the most frequent, direct and effective treatment when feasible. In

laryngeal locAL, endoscopic surgery with laser CO2 has
been proven effective [95]. Radiotherapy has proven effective in small case series and may be considered in selected
cases [96,97]. Systemic chemotherapy is not required in
localised AL in general. Local progression with recurrence
of the amyloidoma or with progression of amyloid deposition in adjacent anatomic sites can occur in 17–31% of
cases [4,89,90,98]. Patients who responded to local treatment
have a lower risk of progression and it has been hypothesised that local B-cell clone and the inflammatory infiltrate
may play a role in progression [86,90].
Recommendation:
 Local treatment (surgical, laser or cytotherapeutic debulking) (Grade B; Level III)
 Chemotherapy is not generally recommended

Anti-amyloid fibril treatments
Monoclonal antibodies (MoAb) directed against the amyloid
fibrils or serum amyloid P-component (SAP) have been
developed. However, controlled trials of the anti-SAP MoAb
(dezamizumab) plus the SAP-depleting agent (miridesap)
and of the anti-fibril MoAb birtamimab were interrupted
due to unfavourable risk-benefit profile [99] or futility
[100]. Nevertheless, a signal of efficacy of birtamimab in
patients at Mayo Clinic stage IV was seen and clinical trials
are planned in this setting. The anti-amyloid light chain
MoAb CAEL-101 that binds amyloid deposits in vivo gave
promising results in early single-arm studies [101,102] and
randomised trials in cardiac AL amyloidosis are underway
(NCT04512235, NCT04504825).
The antibiotic doxycycline can inhibit amyloid fibril formation in vivo [103] and abrogate light chain toxicity [104].
A couple of small retrospective studies showed that doxycycline may reduce early mortality in cardiac patients when
used as antibiotic prophylaxis along with effective chemotherapy [105,106], and a controlled study is underway
(NCT03474458). A recent randomised study from China
failed to show benefit of doxycycline added to standard of
care [107]. At present, the use of amyloid-targeting agents
cannot be recommended outside clinical trials.
Recommendation:
 Doxycycline (Grade C; Level IV)
 Antifebrile antibodies are not recommended outside of
clinical trials

Conclusion
The treatment of AL amyloidosis has evolved with first treatment licenced in 2021. Despite this, majority of treatment recommendations are based on small phase II studies,
retrospective studies and expert consensus. The recommendations suggested follow the grade classification for levels of evidence (Table 2). For all treatment options, the
recommendations of this committee are to follow the clinical
presentation which determines treatment tolerance tempered

AMYLOID

11

Table 2. Levels of evidence.
Level of
evidence
Ia
Ib
IIa
IIb

Grade of
recommendation
A
A
B
B

III

B

IV

C

Basis
Evidence obtained from meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials
Evidence obtained from at least one randomised controlled trial
Evidence obtained from at least one well-designed, non-randomised study, including phase II trials and case-control studies
Evidence obtained from at least one other type of well-designed, quasi-experimental study, i.e. studies without planned
intervention, including observational studies
Evidence obtained from well-designed, non-experimental descriptive studies. Evidence obtained from meta-analysis
or randomised controlled trials or phase II studies which is published only in abstract form
Evidence obtained from expert committee reports or opinions and/or clinical experience of respected authorities

Table 3. Recommendations for non-transplant treatment of AL amyloidosis.
Recommended treatments
Status

Patient

Risk assessment

Cardiac stage IIIb

Relapsed

Patients with significant neuropathy

All stages

Proteasome inhibitor Naïve or prolonged response to 1st line PI

All stages

Proteasome
Inhibitor
Exposed

First choice

Cardiac stage I–IIIa Dara-CyBorDA

Newly
Patients without significant neuropathy
diagnosed

Daratumumab Naïve

All stages

IMiD Naïve

All stages

Lenalidomide refractory

All stages

t(11;14)

All stages

IgM related AL (With lymphoid component in the marrow)

All stages

Dose modified Dara-CyBorDC
Single agent daratumumabC
Single agent daratumumabC
Lenalidomide-DexamethasoneB
CyBorD/VMDexB
Ixazomib-DexA
Single agent daratumumabB
Dara-V(C)D C
Lenalidomide-Dexamethasone
(±cyclophosphamide)B
PomalidomideDexamethasoneB
VenetoclaxC
Rituximab-BendamustineC
ASCT C

Alternative
CyBorDB
VMDexA
Dose modified CyBorDB
Or VMDexB
MelDexB
Carfilzomib-DexC
VenetoclaxC
Dara-V(C)DC
Dara-RDB
IsatuximabC
IRDB
BendamustineB
Venetoclax-BortezomibDexamethasoneC
MelDexC
Rituximab-bort-DexC
Rituximab-Cyclo-DexC
CyBorDC
Ibrutinib (±Ritux)C

Dara: Daratumumab; CyBorD: cyclophosphamide-bortezomib-Dexamethasone; VMDex: bortezomib – melphalan-dexamethasone; VCD: bortezomib -cyclophosphamide-dexamethasone; VD: bortezomib -dexamethasone; Ritux: Rituximab; MelDex: oral melphalan dexamethasone; IRD: Ixazomib-lenalidomide-Dexamethasone;
Dex: dexamethasone.
Stages: defined as per the European update of Mayo 2004 staging system.
Dose modification and adjustments mandatory in patients with advanced end organ damage (cardiac or other).
A,B,C
Levels of available evidence for the recommendation.

by potential side effects which limit use of drugs in AL (Table
3). All patients with AL amyloidosis should be considered for
clinical trials where available. Targeted agents like venetoclax
need urgent prospective evaluation. Treatment of the most
unwell patients (those with advanced cardiac AL amyloidosis)
remain unsatisfactory and poorly studied. Future prospective
trials should include advanced stage patients with allow for evidence-based treatment decisions. Therapies targeting amyloid
fibrils or those reducing the proteotoxicity of amyloidogenic
light chains/oligomers are urgently needed.

Limitations
These guidelines are represented as opinions of the key and
experienced leaders in the field of AL amyloidosis since
there are not many randomised clinical trials or evidencebased data on this topic of this rare disease.

circumstances should be reviewed to decide a clinically
appropriate approach including an alternative approach to
the suggestions in the guideline. These recommendations
should not be interpreted as setting a standard of care, or
be deemed inclusive of all proper methods of care nor
exclusive of other methods of care reasonably directed to
obtaining the same results.The ultimate judgement regarding
the propriety of any specific therapy must be made by the
physician and the patient in light of all the circumstances
presented by the individual patient, and the known variability and biological behaviour of the disease. These recommendations reflect the best available data at the time this
document was prepared. The results of future studies may
require revisions to the recommendations in this document
to reflect new data.

Disclosure statement
Disclaimer
The guidance may not be appropriate to all patients with
AL amyloidosis and in all cases individual patient

Received honorarium/advisory boards/Travel support:
AW: Alexion, Attralus, Janssen, GSK, Takeda; Institutional research
support: Amgen, Binding Site, Pfizer, Alnylam.
MTC: Janssen, Amgen, Akcea and Sanofi.

12

A. D. WECHALEKAR ET AL.

SDG: Janssen, Amgen and BMS.
VS: Celgene, Millennium-Takeda, Janssen, Prothena, Sorrento,
Karyopharm, Oncopeptide, Caelum, Pfizer, Attralus.
SK: (non-personal payment) Abbvie, Amgen, BMS, Janssen, RocheGenentech, Takeda, Astra-Zeneca, Bluebird Bio, Epizyme, Secura
Biotherapeutics, Monterosa therapeutics, Trillium, Loxo Oncology,
K36, Sanofi, ArcellX, and (with personal payment) Oncopeptides,
Beigene, Antengene; Institutional research support: Abbvie, Amgen,
Allogene, Astra-Zeneca, BMS, Carsgen, GSK, Janssen, Novartis, RocheGenentech, Takeda, Regeneron, Molecular Templates.
GP: Alexion, Argobio, Janssen, Protego, Gate bioscience, Pfizer, Sebia,
Siemens, The Binding Site (Research funding, honoraria).
GM: nil.
AJ: Nil.
SS: Janssen, Telix, Prothena,Takeda, Pfizer, Binding Site, Jazz Research
support from Janssen, Prothena and Sanofi z.
CV: Janssen, BMS, Amgen, Sanofi, Pfizer, GSK, FORUS.

Funding
The author(s) reported there is no funding associated with the work
featured in this article.

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]
[15]
[16]

[17]

ORCID
M. Teresa Cibeira
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4036-754X
Shaji Kumar
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-5392-9284
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-6307-2445
Vaishali Sanchorawala
http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4853-5579
Stefan Sch€
onland
Efstathios Kastritis
http://orcid.org/0000-0001-8191-5832

[18]

[19]

[20]

References
[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

Wechalekar AD, Schonland SO, Kastritis E, et al. A European
collaborative study of treatment outcomes in 346 patients with
cardiac stage III AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2013;121(17):
3420–3427.
Kumar S, Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ, et al. Revised prognostic
staging system for light chain amyloidosis incorporating cardiac biomarkers and serum free light chain measurements.
J Clin Oncol. 2012;30(9):989–295.
Palladini G, Dispenzieri A, Gertz MA, et al. New criteria for
response to treatment in immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis based on free light chain measurement and cardiac biomarkers: impact on survival outcomes. J Clin Oncol. 2012;
30(36):4541–4549.
Mahmood S, Bridoux F, Venner CP, et al. Natural history and
outcomes in localised immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis:
a long-term observational study. Lancet Haematol. 2015;2(6):
e241-250–e250.
Palladini G, Schonland SO, Sanchorawala V, et al. Clarification
on the definition of complete haematologic response in lightchain (AL) amyloidosis. Amyloid. 2021;28(1):1–2.
Manwani R, Cohen O, Sharpley F, et al. A prospective observational study of 915 patients with systemic AL amyloidosis
treated with upfront bortezomib. Blood. 2019;134(25):
2271–2280.
Sidana S, Dispenzieri A, Murray DL, et al. Revisiting complete
response in light chain amyloidosis. Leukemia. 2020;34(5):
1472–1475.
Muchtar E, Gertz MA, Lacy MQ, et al. Refining amyloid complete hematological response: quantitative serum free light
chains superior to ratio. Am J Hematol. 2020;95(11):
1280–1287.
Milani P, Basset M, Nuvolone M, et al. Indicators of profound
hematologic response in AL amyloidosis: complete response
remains the goal of therapy. Blood Cancer J. 2020;10(8):90.

[21]

[22]

[23]

[24]

[25]

[26]

[27]

[28]

[29]

Kastritis E, Fotiou D, Theodorakakou F, et al. Timing and
impact of a deep response in the outcome of patients with systemic light chain (AL) amyloidosis. Amyloid. 2021;28(1):3–11.
Ravichandran S, Mahmood S, Wisniowski B, et al. A UK consensus algorithm for early treatment modification in newly diagnosed systemic light-chain amyloidosis. Br J Haematol. 2022.
doi: 10.1111/bjh.18216
Palladini G, Paiva B, Wechalekar A, et al. Minimal residual disease negativity by next-generation flow cytometry is associated
with improved organ response in AL amyloidosis. Blood
Cancer J. 2021;11(2):34.
Kastritis E, Kostopoulos IV, Theodorakakou F, et al. Next generation flow cytometry for MRD detection in patients with AL
amyloidosis. Amyloid. 2021;28(1):19–23.
Cibeira MT, Ortiz-Perez JT, Quintana LF, et al. Supportive
care in AL amyloidosis. Acta Haematol. 2020;143(4):335–342.
Cuddy SAM, Dorbala S, Falk RH. Complexities and pitfalls in
cardiac amyloidosis. Circulation. 2020;142(4):409–415.
Sanchorawala V, Boccadoro M, Gertz M, et al. Guidelines for
high dose chemotherapy and stem cell transplantation for systemic AL amyloidosis: EHA-ISA working group guidelines.
Amyloid. 2022;29(1):1–7.
Palladini G, Milani P, Foli A, et al. Oral melphalan and dexamethasone grants extended survival with minimal toxicity in
AL amyloidosis: long-term results of a risk-adapted approach.
Haematologica. 2014;99(4):743–750.
Kastritis E, Leleu X, Arnulf B, et al. Bortezomib, melphalan,
and dexamethasone for light-chain amyloidosis. J Clin Oncol.
2020;38(28):3252–3260.
Oliva L, Orfanelli U, Resnati M, et al. The amyloidogenic light
chain is a stressor that sensitizes plasma cells to proteasome
inhibitor toxicity. Blood. 2017;129(15):2132–2142.
Reece DE, Hegenbart U, Sanchorawala V, et al. Efficacy and
safety of once-weekly and twice-weekly bortezomib in patients
with relapsed systemic AL amyloidosis: results of a phase 1/2
study. Blood. 2011;118(4):865–873.
Kastritis E, Anagnostopoulos A, Roussou MT, et al. Treatment of
light chain (AL) amyloidosis with the combination of bortezomib
and dexamethasone. Haematologica. 2007;92(10):1351–1358.
Kastritis E, Wechalekar AD, Dimopoulos MA, et al. Bortezomib
with or without dexamethasone in primary systemic (light chain)
amyloidosis. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(6):1031–1037.
Palladini G, Sachchithanantham S, Milani P, et al. A European
collaborative study of cyclophosphamide, bortezomib, and
dexamethasone in upfront treatment of systemic AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2015;126(5):612–615.
Mikhael JR, Schuster SR, Jimenez-Zepeda VH, et al.
Cyclophosphamide-bortezomib-dexamethasone (CyBorD) produces rapid and complete hematologic response in patients
with AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2012;119(19):4391–4394.
Venner CP, Lane T, Foard D, et al. Cyclophosphamide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone therapy in AL amyloidosis is associated with high clonal response rates and prolonged
progression-free survival. Blood. 2012;119(19):4387–4390.
Venner CP, Gillmore JD, Sachchithanantham S, et al. A
matched comparison of cyclophosphamide, bortezomib and
dexamethasone (CVD) versus risk-adapted cyclophosphamide,
thalidomide and dexamethasone (CTD) in AL amyloidosis.
Leukemia. 2014;28(12):2304–2310.
Jaccard A, Comenzo RL, Hari P, et al. Efficacy of bortezomib,
cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone in treatment-naive
patients with high-risk cardiac AL amyloidosis (mayo clinic
stage III). Haematologica. 2014;99(9):1479–1485.
Muchtar E, Dispenzieri A, Kumar SK, et al. Interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization in untreated AL amyloidosis has an
independent prognostic impact by abnormality type and treatment category. Leukemia. 2017;31(7):1562–1569.
Bochtler T, Hegenbart U, Kunz C, et al. Translocation t(11;14)
is associated with adverse outcome in patients with newly

AMYLOID

[30]

[31]

[32]

[33]

[34]

[35]

[36]

[37]

[38]

[39]

[40]

[41]

[42]

[43]

[44]

[45]

[46]

[47]

diagnosed AL amyloidosis when treated with bortezomib-based
regimens. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(12):1371–1378.
Cole DC, Frishman WH. Cardiovascular complications of proteasome inhibitors used in multiple myeloma. Cardiol Rev.
2018;26(3):122–129.
Bruce JT, Tran JM, Phillips G, et al. Chemotherapeutic agents
increase the risk for pulmonary function test abnormalities in
patients with multiple myeloma. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma
Leuk. 2012;12(5):325–329.
Dispenzieri A, Kastritis E, Wechalekar AD, et al. A randomized
phase 3 study of ixazomib-dexamethasone versus physician’s
choice in relapsed or refractory AL amyloidosis. Leukemia.
2022;36(1):225–235.
Sanchez L, Landau HJ, Rosenbaum CA, et al. A phase 1/2
study to assess safety and dose of ixazomib in combination
with cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone in newly diagnosed patients with light chain (AL) amyloidosis. Blood. 2019;
134(Supplement_1):3128–3128.
Muchtar E, Gertz MA, Laplant B, et al. Phase 2 trial of ixazomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone for treatment of
previously untreated light chain amyloidosis. Blood. 2020;
136(Supplement 1):52–53.
Wei Z, Zhang Y, Li J, et al. Upfront ixazomib plus dexamethasone induce promptly hematological response in patients with
light-chain amyloidosis. Blood. 2019;134(Supplement_1):
1908–1908.
Manwani R, Mahmood S, Sachchithanantham S, et al.
Carfilzomib is an effective upfront treatment in AL amyloidosis
patients with peripheral and autonomic neuropathy. Br J
Haematol. 2019;187(5):638–641.
Garg M, Hall A, Jenner M, et al. A phase 1 study of carfilzomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone in patients with relapsed/
refractory AL amyloidosis – catalyst trial results. Blood. 2019;
134(Supplement_1):1890–1890.
Dispenzieri A, Lacy MQ, Rajkumar SV, et al. Poor tolerance to
high doses of thalidomide in patients with primary systemic
amyloidosis. Amyloid. 2003;10(4):257–261.
Cibeira MT, Oriol A, Lahuerta JJ, et al. Phase II trial of lenalidomide, dexamethasone and cyclophosphamide (lendexal) for
previously untreated patients with light-chain amyloidosis.
Haematologica. 2014;99:117–118.
Moreau P, Jaccard A, Benboubker L, et al. Lenalidomide in combination with melphalan and dexamethasone in patients with
newly diagnosed light-chain (AL)-amyloidosis: a multicentre
phase I/II dose escalation study. Amyloid. 2010;17:87–88.
Kastritis E, Dialoupi I, Gavriatopoulou M, et al. Primary treatment of light-chain amyloidosis with bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone. Blood Adv. 2019;3(20):3002–3009.
Milani P, Sharpley F, Schonland SO, et al. Pomalidomide and
dexamethasone grant rapid haematologic responses in patients
with relapsed and refractory AL amyloidosis: a European retrospective series of 153 patients. Amyloid. 2020;27(4):231–236.
Dispenzieri A, Buadi F, Laumann K, et al. Activity of pomalidomide in patients with immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis. Blood. 2012;119(23):5397–5404.
Zonder JA, Sanchorawala V, Kukreti V, et al. Phase I trial of
pomalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone as frontline
treatment of AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2019;134(Supplement 1):
1845.
Kaufman GP, Schrier SL, Lafayette RA, et al. Daratumumab
yields rapid and deep hematologic responses in patients with
heavily pretreated AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2017;130(7):900–902.
Sanchorawala V, Sarosiek S, Schulman A, et al. Safety, tolerability, and response rates of daratumumab in relapsed AL
amyloidosis: results of a phase 2 study. Blood. 2020;135(18):
1541–1547.
Roussel M, Merlini G, Chevret S, et al. A prospective phase 2
trial of daratumumab in patients with previously treated systemic light-chain amyloidosis. Blood. 2020;135(18):1531–1540.

[48]

[49]

[50]

[51]

[52]

[53]

[54]

[55]

[56]

[57]

[58]

[59]

[60]

[61]

[62]

[63]

[64]

13

Palladini G, Kastritis E, Maurer MS, et al. Daratumumab plus
CyBorD for patients with newly diagnosed AL amyloidosis:
safety run-in results of ANDROMEDA. Blood. 2020;136(1):
71–80.
Comenzo R, Palladini G, Kastritis E, et al. Subcutaneous
daratumumab with bortezomib, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone in patients with newly diagnosed light chain (AL)
amyloidosis: 18-month analysis of the phase 3 ANDROMEDA
study. Blood. 2021;138(Supplement 1):159–159.
Kastritis E, Roussakis P, Kostopoulos IV, et al. Short daratumumab consolidation in patients with AL amyloidosis or
LCDD improves complete response rates and modifies bone
marrow microenvironment. Blood. 2020;136(Supplement 1):
25–25.
Le Bras F, Molinier-Frenkel V, Guellich A, et al. Sequential
cyclophosphamide-bortezomib-dexamethasone unmasks the
harmful cardiac effect of dexamethasone in primary light-chain
cardiac amyloidosis. Eur J Cancer. 2017;76:183–187.
Kastritis E, Minnema MC, Dimopoulos MA, et al. Efficacy and
safety of daratumumab monotherapy in newly diagnosed
patients with stage 3b light chain amyloidosis: a phase 2 study
by the European myeloma network. Blood. 2021;
138(Supplement 1):2730–2730.
Kimmich CR, Terzer T, Benner A, et al. Daratumumab for systemic AL amyloidosis: prognostic factors and adverse outcome
with nephrotic-range albuminuria. Blood. 2020;135(18):
1517–1530.
Luo MM, Zhu PP, Nnane I, et al. Population pharmacokinetics
and exposure-response modeling of daratumumab subcutaneous administration in patients with light-chain amyloidosis. J
Clin Pharmacol. 2022;62(5):656–669.
Sidana S, Larson DP, Greipp PT, et al. IgM AL amyloidosis:
delineating disease biology and outcomes with clinical, genomic and bone marrow morphological features. Leukemia.
2020;34(5):1373–1382.
Milani P, Schonland S, Merlini G, et al. Treatment of AL amyloidosis with bendamustine: a study of 122 patients. Blood.
2018;132(18):1988–1991.
Manwani R, Sachchithanantham S, Mahmood S, et al. Treatment
of IgM-associated immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis with
rituximab-bendamustine. Blood. 2018;132(7):761–764.
Buske C, Dimopoulos MA, Grunenberg A, et al. Bortezomib in
combination with dexamethasone, rituximab and cyclophosphamide (B-DRC) as first – line treatment of waldenstrom’s
macroglobulinemia: results of a prospectively randomized multicenter European phase II trial. Blood. 2020;136(Supplement
1):26–26.
Dimopoulos MA, Roussou M, Kastritis E, et al. Primary treatment of waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia with dexamethasone, rituximab and cyclophosphamide (DRC): final analysis of
a phase II study. Blood. 2012;120(21):438–438.
Ghobrial IM, Hong FX, Padmanabhan S, et al. Phase II trial of
weekly bortezomib in combination with rituximab in relapsed
or relapsed/refractory waldenstrom’s macroglobulinemia.
Blood. 2009;114(22):1067.
Pika T, Hegenbart U, Flodrova P, et al. First report of ibrutinib
in IgM-related amyloidosis: few responses, poor tolerability,
and short survival. Blood. 2018;131(3):368–371.
Sidiqi MH, Buadi FK, Dispenzieri A, et al. Autologous stem
cell transplant for IgM-associated amyloid light-chain amyloidosis. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2019;25(3):e108–e111.
Tandon N, Sidana S, Rajkumar SV, et al. Predictors of early
treatment failure following initial therapy for systemic
immunoglobulin light-chain amyloidosis. Amyloid. 2017;24(3):
183–188.
Palladini G, Milani P, Foli A, et al. Presentation and outcome
with second-line treatment in AL amyloidosis previously sensitive to nontransplant therapies. Blood. 2018;131(5):525–532.

14

[65]

[66]

[67]

[68]

[69]

[70]

[71]
[72]

[73]

[74]

[75]

[76]

[77]

[78]

[79]

[80]

[81]

[82]

[83]

A. D. WECHALEKAR ET AL.

Palladini G, Merlini G. When should treatment of AL amyloidosis start at relapse? Early, to prevent organ progression. Blood
Adv. 2019;3(2):212–215.
Sanchorawala V. Delay treatment of AL amyloidosis at relapse
until symptomatic: devil is in the details. Blood Adv. 2019;3(2):
216–218.
Cohen OC, Sharpley F, Gillmore JD, et al. Use of ixazomib,
lenalidomide and dexamethasone in patients with relapsed
amyloid light-chain amyloidosis. Br J Haematol. 2020;189(4):
643–649.
Milani P, Fazio F, Basset M, et al. High rate of profound clonal
and renal responses with daratumumab treatment in heavily
pre-treated patients with light chain (AL) amyloidosis and high
bone marrow plasma cell infiltrate. Am J Hematol. 2020;95(8):
900–905.
Cohen OC, Brodermann MH, Blakeney IJ, et al. Rapid
response to single agent daratumumab is associated with
improved progression-free survival in relapsed/refractory AL
amyloidosis. Amyloid. 2020;27(3):200–205.
Antonioli E, Staderini M, Pilerci S, et al. Daratumumab, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone combination in relapsed/refractory myeloma patients: a real-life single-center experience.
Leuk Lymphoma. 2020;61(13):3255–3258.
Jelinek T, Kufova Z, Hajek R. Immunomodulatory drugs in AL
amyloidosis. Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2016;99:249–260.
Basset M, Kimmich CR, Schreck N, et al. Lenalidomide and
dexamethasone in relapsed/refractory immunoglobulin light
chain (AL) amyloidosis: results from a large cohort of patients
with long follow-up. Br J Haematol. 2021;195(2):230–243.
Sanchorawala V, Wright DG, Rosenzweig M, et al. Lenalidomide
and dexamethasone in the treatment of AL amyloidosis: results
of a phase 2 trial. Blood. 2007;109(2):492–496.
Kumar SK, Hayman SR, Buadi FK, et al. Lenalidomide, cyclophosphamide, and dexamethasone (CRd) for light-chain amyloidosis: long-term results from a phase 2 trial. Blood. 2012;
119(21):4860–4867.
Kastritis E, Terpos E, Roussou M, et al. A phase 1/2 study of
lenalidomide with low-dose oral cyclophosphamide and lowdose dexamethasone (RdC) in AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2012;
119(23):5384–5390.
Palladini G, Milani P, Foli A, et al. A phase 2 trial of pomalidomide and dexamethasone rescue treatment in patients with
AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2017;129(15):2120–2123.
Sanchorawala V, Shelton AC, Lo S, et al. Pomalidomide and
dexamethasone in the treatment of AL amyloidosis: results of a
phase 1 and 2 trial. Blood. 2016;128(8):1059–1062.
Lentzsch S, Lagos GG, Comenzo RL, et al. Bendamustine with
dexamethasone in relapsed/refractory systemic light-chain
amyloidosis: results of a phase II study. J Clin Oncol. 2020;
38(13):1455–1462.
Gupta VA, Ackley J, Kaufman JL, et al. BCL2 family inhibitors
in the biology and treatment of multiple myeloma. Blood
Lymphat Cancer. 2021;11:11–24.
Kumar SK, Harrison SJ, Cavo M, et al. Venetoclax or placebo
in combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone in
patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma
(BELLINI): a randomised, double-blind, multicentre, phase 3
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(12):1630–1642.
Premkumar VJ, Lentzsch S, Pan S, et al. Venetoclax induces
deep hematologic remissions in t(11;14) relapsed/refractory AL
amyloidosis. Blood Cancer J. 2021;11(1):10.
Maples KT, Johnson C, Lonial S. Antibody treatment in multiple myeloma. Clin Advanc Hematol Oncol. 2021;19(3):
166–174.
Trudel S, Lendvai N, Popat R, et al. Targeting B-cell maturation antigen with GSK2857916 antibody-drug conjugate in
relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (BMA117159): a dose
escalation and expansion phase 1 trial. Lancet Oncl. 2018;
19(12):1641–1653.

[84]

[85]

[86]
[87]

[88]

[89]

[90]

[91]

[92]

[93]

[94]

[95]
[96]

[97]

[98]

[99]

[100]

[101]

[102]

Rosenzweig M, Urak R, Walter M, et al. Preclinical data support leveraging CS1 chimeric antigen receptor T-cell therapy
for systemic light chain amyloidosis. Cytotherapy. 2017;19(7):
861–866.
Iqbal SM, Stecklein K, Sarow J, et al. Elotuzumab in combination with lenalidomide and dexamethasone for treatmentresistant immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis with multiple myeloma. Clin Lymphoma Myeloma Leuk. 2019;19(1):
e33–e36.
Westermark P. Localized AL amyloidosis: a suicidal neoplasm?
Ups J Med Sci. 2012;117(2):244–250.
Hamidi Asl K, Liepnieks JJ, Nakamura M, et al. Organ-specific
(localized) synthesis of Ig light chain amyloid. J Immunol.
1999;162(9):5556–5560.
Stuhlmann-Laeisz C, Sch€
onland SO, Hegenbart U, et al. AL
amyloidosis with a localized B cell neoplasia. Virchows Arch.
2019;474(3):353–363.
Kourelis TV, Kyle RA, Dingli D, et al. Presentation and outcomes of localized immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis:
the mayo clinic experience. Mayo Clin Proc. 2017;92(6):
908–917.
Basset M, Hummedah K, Kimmich C, et al. Localized
immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis: novel insights including prognostic factors for local progression. Am J Hematol.
2020;95(10):1158–1169.
Meijer JM, Schonland SO, Palladini G, et al. Sjogren’s syndrome and localized nodular cutaneous amyloidosis: coincidence or a distinct clinical entity? Arthritis Rheum. 2008;58(7):
1992–1999.
Grogg KL, Aubry MC, Vrana JA, et al. Nodular pulmonary
amyloidosis is characterized by localized immunoglobulin
deposition and is frequently associated with an indolent B-cell
lymphoproliferative disorder. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013;37(3):
406–412.
Ryan RJ, Sloan JM, Collins AB, et al. Extranodal marginal zone
lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue with amyloid
deposition: a clinicopathologic case series. Am J Clin Pathol.
2012;137(1):51–64.
Basset
M,
Defrancesco
I,
Milani
P,
et
al.
Nonlymphoplasmacytic lymphomas associated with light-chain
amyloidosis. Blood. 2020;135(4):293–296.
Burns H, Phillips N. Laryngeal amyloidosis. Curr Opin
Otolaryngol Head Neck Surg. 2019;27(6):467–474.
Truong MT, Kachnic LA, Grillone GA, et al. Long-term results
of conformal radiotherapy for progressive airway amyloidosis.
Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2012;83(2):734–739.
Copperman TS, Truong MT, Berk JL, et al. External beam
radiation for localized periocular amyloidosis: a case series.
Orbit. 2019;38(3):210–216.
Harris G, Lachmann H, Hawkins P, et al. One hundred cases
of localized laryngeal amyloidosis – evidence for future management. Laryngoscope. 2021;131(6):E1912–E1917.
Wechalekar A, Antoni G, Al Azzam W, et al.
Pharmacodynamic evaluation and safety assessment of treatment with antibodies to serum amyloid P component in
patients with cardiac amyloidosis: an open-label phase 2 study
and an adjunctive immuno-PET imaging study. BMC
Cardiovasc Disord. 2022;22(1):49.
Gertz MA, Cohen AD, Comenzo RL, et al. Results of the phase
3 VITAL study of NEOD001 (birtamimab) plus standard of
care in patients with light chain (AL) amyloidosis suggest survival benefit for mayo stage IV patients. Blood. 2019;
134(Supplement_1):3166–3166.
Van Doren L, Lentzsch S. Nonchemotherapy treatment of
immunoglobulin light chain amyloidosis. Acta Haematol. 2020;
143(4):373–380.
Edwards CV, Rao N, Bhutani D, et al. Phase 1a/b study of
monoclonal antibody CAEL-101 (11-1F4) in patients with AL
amyloidosis. Blood. 2021;138(25):2632–2641.

AMYLOID

[103]

[104]

[105]

[106]

Cardoso I, Saraiva MJ. Doxycycline disrupts transthyretin
amyloid: evidence from studies in a FAP transgenic mice
model. Faseb J. 2006;20(2):234–239.
Faravelli G, Raimondi S, Marchese L, et al. C. elegans expressing D76N beta2-microglobulin: a model for in vivo screening
of drug candidates targeting amyloidosis. Sci Rep. 2019;9(1):
19960.
Wechalekar AD, Whelan C. Encouraging impact of doxycycline on early mortality in cardiac light chain (AL) amyloidosis.
Blood Cancer J. 2017;7(3):e546.
D’Souza A, Flynn K, Chhabra S, et al. Rationale and design of
DUAL study: doxycycline to upgrade response in light chain
(AL) amyloidosis (DUAL): a phase 2 pilot study of a twopronged approach of prolonged doxycycline with plasma celldirected therapy in the treatment of AL amyloidosis. Contemp
Clin Trials Commun. 2017;8:33–38.

[107]

[108]

[109]

[110]

15

Shen KN, Fu WJ, Wu Y, et al. Doxycycline combined with
bortezomib-cyclophosphamide-dexamethasone chemotherapy
for newly diagnosed cardiac light-chain amyloidosis: a multicenter randomized controlled trial. Circulation. 2022;145(1):
8–17.
Gertz MA, Comenzo R, Falk RH, et al. Definition of organ
involvement and treatment response in immunoglobulin light
chain amyloidosis (AL): a consensus opinion from the 10th
international symposium on amyloid and amyloidosis, tours,
France, 18-22 April 2004. Am J Hematol. 2005;79(4):319–328.
Gertz MA, Merlini G. Definition of organ involvement and
response to treatment in AL amyloidosis: an updated consensus opinion. Amyloid. 2010;17:48–49.
Palladini G, Hegenbart U, Milani P, et al. A staging system for
renal outcome and early markers of renal response to chemotherapy in AL amyloidosis. Blood. 2014;124(15):2325–2332.

