SPECIAL ARTICLE

Metastatic colorectal cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline for diagnosis,
treatment and follow-up5
A. Cervantes1,2, R. Adam3, S. Roselló1,2, D. Arnold4, N. Normanno5, J. Taïeb6,7, J. Seligmann8, T. De Baere9,10,11,
P. Osterlund12,13, T. Yoshino14 & E. Martinelli15, on behalf of the ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1

Department of Medical Oncology, INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute, University of Valencia, Valencia; 2CIBERONC, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain;
AP-HP Hôpital Paul Brousse, Université Paris-Saclay, ER “Chronothérapie, Cancers, Transplantation”, Villejuif, France; 4Department of Oncology and Hematology,
Asklepios Tumourzentrum Hamburg, AK Altona, Hamburg, Germany; 5Cell Biology and Biotherapy Unit, Istituto Nazionale Tumouri, ‘Fondazione G. Pascale’dIRCCS,
Naples, Italy; 6Department of Gastroenterology and GI Oncology, Georges Pompidou European Hospital, Assitance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris AP-HP Paris Centre,
Paris; 7Paris Cancer Institute SIRIC CARPEM, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Paris-Cité, Paris, France; 8Leeds Institute of Medical Research at St James’s,
University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; 9Department of Interventional Radiology, Gustave Roussy, Villejuif; 10University of Paris-Saclay, UFR Médecine Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre; 11Centre d’Investigation Clinique BIOTHERIS, INSERM CIC1428, Villejuif, France; 12Tampere University Hospitals and University, Tampere, Finland;
13
Tema Cancer/GI-oncology, Karolinska Comprehensive Cancer Centre, Karolinska Institute, Solna, Sweden; 14Department of Gastroenterology and Gastrointestinal
Oncology, National Cancer Center Hospital East, Kashiwa, Japan; 15Department of Precision Medicine, Oncology Unit, Università della Campania “L. Vanvitelli”, Naples,
Italy
3

Available online 25 October 2022

Key words: metastatic colorectal cancer, Clinical Practice Guidelines, diagnosis, treatment, follow-up

INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY
Colorectal cancer (CRC) is the third most common cancer
worldwide, with 1.1 million new cases per year, and is the
second leading cause of cancer death.1 CRC occurs more
frequently in middle- to high-income countries with an
eightfold variation in incidence across the world. This rise
may be associated with known risk factors, including
alcohol intake, tobacco use, obesity, sedentariness and
dietary patterns (diets low in fruits, vegetables and unreﬁned plant food, and high in red meat, processed foods and
fat).1,2
In Europe in 2018, CRC accounted for the second highest
number of cancer deaths. However, mortality has declined
since 2012.2 In middle- to high-income countries this reﬂects screening and early detection programmes, better
therapeutic approaches (systemic therapies, biomarkerguided integration of biologicals, resection of metastases
and local ablative therapies), allowing more patients the
opportunity of prolonged disease control, and even cure.
Approximately 15%-30% of patients present with metastases, and 20%-50% of patients with initially localised
*Correspondence to: ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via
Ginevra 4, CH-6900 Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
5
Note: Approved by the ESMO Guidelines Committee: April 2002, last update November 2002. This publication supersedes the previously published
versiondAnn Oncol. 2014;25(suppl 3):iii1-iii9.
0923-7534/© 2022 European Society for Medical Oncology. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

10

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

disease will develop metastases. The most common location
of metastases being liver, then lung, peritoneum and distant
lymph nodes.
This European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO)
Guideline describes improvements in diagnosis, staging
and treatment of metastatic CRC (mCRC) patients, which
have contributed to the current ‘state-of-the-art’ treatment approaches, and provides guidance for the
comprehensive management of patients with mCRC.
DIAGNOSIS, PATHOLOGY AND MOLECULAR BIOLOGY
A clinical or biological suspicion of mCRC should always be
conﬁrmed by adequate radiological imaging and histology
of the primary tumour or metastases before the administration of any therapy.
Tissue handling procedures should be optimised to allow
biomarker testing. Fixation with 10% neutral buffered
formalin (4% formaldehyde) for no less than 6 h and no
more than 48 h is recommended. The primary pathologist
should review all available tumour specimens and enrich
samples by macro-dissection to maximise tumour cell content (>20%) before DNA extraction.
Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, describes biomarkers and molecular targets for precision medicines and corresponding
ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets
(ESCAT) scores. Testing for mismatch repair (MMR) status
and KRAS, NRAS exon 2, 3 and 4 as well as BRAF mutations
is recommended in all patients at the time of mCRC
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

diagnosis, due to its relevance in selecting ﬁrst-line therapy.
This can be carried out on either the primary tumour or any
metastatic site, with a suggested turnaround of 10 days.
As these mutations are negative predictive factors for the
use of anti-epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR)
monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), RAS testing is mandatory
before this treatment is initiated.3-5 Laboratories providing
RAS testing should demonstrate successful participation in a
relevant external quality assessment scheme. In situations
where adequate tissue is not available, exclusion of a RAS
mutation status can be conducted by analysing plasmaderived cell-free DNA.6-8
BRAF V600E mutation is a strong negative prognostic
factor in mCRC. BRAF mutation status should be assessed
simultaneously with RAS testing for prognostication. Additionally, treatment with cetuximabeencorafenib has shown
better response, progression-free survival (PFS) and overall
survival (OS) than treatment with irinotecanecetuximab in
BRAF V600E-mutant mCRC in second- and third-line treatment.9 Non-V600E class III BRAF mutations are not associated with a worse prognosis, while the role of class II
mutations remains unclear.10
Deﬁcient mismatch repair (dMMR)/microsatellite instability (MSI) testing in mCRC can assist clinicians with genetic
counselling, including for identiﬁcation of Lynch syndrome,
and should be done to select patients for immune checkpoint
inhibition (ICI) as part of the initial molecular work-up.11-13
Identiﬁcation of human epidermal growth factor receptor
2 (HER2) ampliﬁcation by immunohistochemistry (IHC) or
FISH is recommended in RAS wild-type (wt) patients to
detect those who may beneﬁt from HER2 blockade.14 For
practical reasons, this could be done with the initial molecular tests, but anti-HER2 inhibition is only recommended
in second and further lines. Therefore, the HER2 ampliﬁcation will only inﬂuence a treatment plan after at least ﬁrstline progression.
Testing of other biomarkers including ALK and ROS1 gene
fusions, mutations of PIK3CA and HER2 activating mutations
is not (yet) recommended outside clinical trials. NTRK fusions are extremely uncommon in mCRC with an incidence
of <0.5%; however, testing is recommended when feasible.
Screening for NTRK fusions can be carried out by IHC,
followed by conﬁrmation with next generation sequencing.
Most NTRK-rearranged tumours are located in the right
colon and are frequently MSI-high (MSI-H). NTRK testing
could be done at any time but will only inﬂuence treatment
decisions after progression on at least two lines of
treatment. In the rare event of an NTRK fusion detected
after a comprehensive genomic analysis, including RNA,
treatment with larotrectinib or entrectinib is recommended.15-18
As ﬂuoropyrimidines [e.g. 5-ﬂuorouracil (5-FU) and
capecitabine] are utilised in most mCRC patients, testing for
dihydropyrimidine dehydrogenase (DPD) deﬁciency should
be conducted before initiating these drugs; please refer to
the ESMO Clinical Practice Guideline (CPG) on localised
colon cancer for further guidance.19 For triﬂuridinee
tipiracil, DPD testing is not required.
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

Recommendations
 For biomarker testing, ﬁxation with 10% neutral buffered formalin (4% formaldehyde) for no less than 6 h
and no more than 48 h is recommended [V, A].
 The primary pathologist should review all available
tumour specimens and enrich samples by macrodissection to maximise tumour cell content (>20%)
before DNA extraction [IV, A].
 Testing for MMR status and KRAS, NRAS exon 2, 3 and 4
and BRAF mutations is recommended in all patients at
the time of mCRC diagnosis [I, A].
 RAS testing is mandatory before treatment with antiEGFR mAbs and can be carried out on either the primary
tumour or other metastatic sites [III, A].
 BRAF mutation status should be assessed simultaneously with the evaluation of RAS, for prognostic
assessment [I, B] and for the option of treatment with
cetuximabeencorafenib [I, A].
 dMMR/MSI testing in mCRC can assist in genetic
counselling for Lynch syndrome [II, B].
 dMMR/MSI status is also recommended as the initial
molecular work-up in metastatic disease for its predictive value for the use of ICIs [I, A].
 Identiﬁcation of HER2 ampliﬁcation by IHC or FISH is
recommended in RAS-wt patients to detect those who
may beneﬁt from HER2 blockade [III, B].
 Testing of other biomarkers including ALK and ROS1 gene
fusions, mutations of PIK3CA and HER2 activating mutations is not recommended outside clinical trials [IV, D].
 In the rare event that an NTRK fusion is detected by IHC
and/or comprehensive genomic analysis, treatment with
larotrectinib or entrectinib is recommended [III, A].
 Testing for DPD deﬁciency has to be conducted before
initiating 5-FU-based chemotherapy (ChT) [III, A].

STAGING AND RISK ASSESSMENT
After diagnosis of mCRC, apart from a complete medical
history and physical examination, a complete blood count
and biochemical laboratory testing should be carried out,
including carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) and, optionally,
carbohydrate antigen (CA 19-9) levels.
Staging is carried out primarily with imaging techniques,
usually contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of
the thorax, abdomen and pelvis. Valuable additions are
abdominopelvic ultrasonography, preferably with speciﬁc
contrast enhancers, or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
MRI is the preferred choice in case of colorectal liver metastases (CRLMs) amenable to local treatment (LT), to
accurately deﬁne the number and location of metastases.20
The same radiological technique should be used at baseline
and for response assessment after therapy. An [18F]2-ﬂuoro2-deoxy-D-glucoseepositron emission tomography (FDGe
PET) scan can be useful, particularly in patients with
increased tumour markers without evidence of metastatic
disease, or to deﬁne the extent of metastatic disease on
potentially resectable metastases.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

11

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology
At mCRC diagnosis different risk factors should be
considered. Patients with a higher Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status (PS) have worse
prognosis, which can be due to advanced disease stage at
diagnosis and/or because they are unﬁt for active
treatment.21
Proximal colon tumours located before the splenic ﬂexure
have different embryological origins and patterns of molecular characteristics compared with distal tumours.22
Proximal tumours are more frequently mucinous, associated with an inﬂammatory response, with dMMR/MSI-H
and hypermutated, with a higher frequency of KRAS and
BRAF mutations.23 In contrast, distal colon tumours more
frequently have chromosomal alterations, ampliﬁcation of
EGFR and HER2 genes and aberrant EGFR signalling. In
mCRC, patients with proximal colon tumours have a worse
prognosis, independently of the applied treatments.
Resection of the primary tumour is sometimes necessary
because of obstructive symptoms or bleeding; however,
when asymptomatic it is not recommended in unresectable
metastatic disease. Although data from retrospective
studies recommend resection of the primary tumour,24-26
randomised trials speciﬁcally addressing this could not
conﬁrm survival advantage in patients with synchronous
unresectable metastases.27,28
The role of multidisciplinary teams and tumour boards in
the assessment of mCRC patients
Improved clinical outcomes are seen when treatment approaches for individual mCRC patients are discussed within
a multidisciplinary team (MDT) of experts who meet regularly to review mCRC cases.29 The core MDT should include
representation from medical oncology, pathology, diagnostic radiology, radiation oncology, colorectal and hepatobiliary surgery, gastroenterology and stomatherapy
(Supplementary Table S2, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003). Further expertise may be
required from surgeons with peritoneal metastasis expertise, thoracic surgeons, interventional radiologists and nuclear medicine specialists. If not available in a local MDT, an
established referral route should exist with a specialised
cancer centre (virtual MDTs) to ensure equity of access to
optimal care.30
The MDT has an ongoing role throughout the mCRC
patient pathway, initially to review the diagnostic work-up
to deﬁne whether or not a patient has clearly resectable
or unresectable metastatic disease and to consider management of the primary tumour.31,32 Patients deﬁned as
initially unresectable could have a second reassessment of
resectability, preferably within 2-3 months of starting
therapy, as proposed by an expert consensus.33
Conversely, when disease is deemed ‘never to be resectable’, subsequent discussions may be managed by the
treating medical oncologist and patient regarding pros
and cons of various approaches and sequences, based on
the perceived aims.
12

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

Recommendations
 Staging is carried out primarily with imaging techniques,
such as a contrast-enhanced CT of the thorax, abdomen
and pelvis [IV, A].
 A liver MRI is recommended to characterise non-typical
liver lesions on CT scans or when liver metastases
seem resectable or potentially resectable [IV, A].
 An FDGePET scan can be useful, particularly in patients
with increased tumour markers without evidence of metastatic disease, or to deﬁne the extent of metastatic disease on potentially resectable metastases [IV, B].
 Resection of an asymptomatic primary tumour in patients with unresectable metastatic disease cannot be
recommended as standard of care [I, D].
MANAGEMENT OF RESECTABLE/POTENTIALLY RESECTABLE
DISEASE
Treatment of potentially resectable mCRC
Surgical resection of R0-resectable (resectable, leaving no
tumour at the margin) CRLMs is a potentially curative
treatment, with reported 5-year survival rates of 20%-45%.
The criteria for R0-resectability of CRLMs depend on technical and oncological (prognostic) criteria and on the
experience of the MDT.
Technically, resectability is not limited by number, size or
bilobar metastatic involvement, if tumours may be resected
leaving sufﬁcient remnant organ (e.g. 30% remnant liver).
Other ablative techniques, such as thermal ablation (TA) or
stereotactic body radiotherapy (SBRT), may be added to
surgery to achieve a complete treatment or provide an
alternative to resection if inoperable due to frailty or poor
anatomical location for resection.
‘Oncological’ criteria concern prognostic factors that
impact disease-free survival (DFS) or the likelihood of cure.
Characteristics including onset of metastatic disease (synchronous versus metachronous), clinical aggressiveness of
the tumour as well as concomitant extrahepatic disease
could lead to the recommendation of a neoadjuvant strategy instead of upfront surgery to get ‘the proof of time’ for
a well-controlled disease and are seen as relevant factors.
Indeed, up to 55%-80% of patients will experience relapse
following metastatic resection, the majority occurring in the
resected organ. Biological determinants including RAS, BRAF
or dMMR/MSI mutational status may also inﬂuence treatment strategy. Despite the recognised poor prognosis in
some cohorts, patients with BRAF-mutant mCRC who underwent R0 resection of all metastatic lesions had comparable outcomes to their BRAF-wt counterparts. Despite
limited evidence, the exclusion of these patients from a
potentially curative approach does not seem justiﬁed.
With very favourable prognostic criteria and a good
technical resectability, perioperative systemic treatment
may not be needed. Conversely, unfavourable criteria
mandate the use of ‘best systemic treatment’ options. In
patients with an unclear prognostic situation, systemic

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

treatment should be initiated to gain more prognostic insights by observation. The use of perioperative leucovorin
(LV)e5-FUeoxaliplatin (FOLFOX) ChT, 3 months pre- and
post-operatively in patients with technically ‘easy-to-resect’
resectable CRLMs but with negative prognostic factors, has
been positively proven and can be considered as a standard
of care in this circumstance (EORTC 40983 trial).34,35
Most patients have metastatic disease that is not initially
suitable for potentially curative resection. It is, however,
important to select patients with resectable metastases and
those with initially unresectable disease in whom resection
may be possible after a major response with systemic
therapy. The aim of treatment here should be to convert
initially unresectable disease to resectable. Median survival
rates after resection are two- to threefold higher than in
patients treated with systemic therapy alone, with a potential of cure.32
Resection of lung metastases offers 25%-35% 5-year
survival rates in carefully selected patients. Resection of
lung metastases in conjunction with resection of CRLMs has
also shown survival beneﬁt.34,36
In selected patients with limited peritoneal metastasis,
complete cytoreductive surgery and hyperthermic intraperitoneal ChT (HIPEC) may provide prolonged survival
when carried out in experienced high-volume centres (in
view of the relatively high morbidity associated with the
procedure).37-39 This observation, however, has not been
conﬁrmed in randomised, phase III trials and therefore
cannot be recommended as standard of care. A recent
phase III trial (PRODIGE 7) has failed to show the added
value of an oxaliplatin-based HIPEC on cytoreductive surgery. Indeed, the PRODIGE 7 trial reported the absence of
an OS beneﬁt after adding HIPEC to cytoreductive surgery
and more frequent post-operative late complications with
this combination, in patients with colorectal peritoneal
metastases.40 There are ongoing trials to see if other HIPEC
regimens (using mitomycin and different HIPEC procedures)
may possibly lead to better outcomes.
Ovariectomy, lymphadenectomy and resection of
selected other single metastases have also shown survival
beneﬁt in patient series.32
Primarily technically R0-resectable CRLMs. In patients with
‘favourable’ oncological criteria (e.g. metachronous lesions,
fewer metastases, unilobar disease, no extrahepatic disease), upfront resection should be done. The only phase III
trial (dedicated to CRLMs) conducted in this situation
showed a beneﬁt in DFS but a non-signiﬁcant improvement
in OS if perioperative treatment with FOLFOX is
administered.34,41
In patients with ‘unfavourable’ oncological criteria (synchronous lesions, more than three metastases, bilobar disease, limited extrahepatic disease) and ‘favourable surgical’
criteria (e.g. no vascular inﬁltration), perioperative ChT,
preferably with any ﬂuoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin, should
be proposed.
Attention should be paid to the presence of small metastases (10-15 mm), which may disappear while on
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

systemic therapy, with the risk of being missed during surgery while still active in terms of presence of tumour cells.
In this situation, neoadjuvant ChT should not exceed 2
months if indicated; upfront surgery or other interventional
approaches such as a percutaneous destruction should also
be discussed with the MDT. For patients in whom the metastases have disappeared on standard imaging, microscopic disease is often still present and an MDT discussion
of the optimal strategy is required.
Post-operative ChT can be delivered, but the randomised
evidence to support this is scarce and therefore it cannot be
considered as standard of care. Fluoropyrimidineeoxaliplatin-based ChT for 6 months after resection of metastases
may improve outcomes unless patients failed a prior adjuvant treatment (oxaliplatin-based) for stage II or III disease
within 12 months. Targeted agents are not recommended
during perioperative therapy in patients with upfront
resectable metastases.35,42 Perioperative or post-operative
adjuvant treatment strategy decisions may be inﬂuenced
by ‘biology of the disease’, the timing of onset of metastases
(synchronous versus metachronous), technical criteria for
resectability (or ablation) and/or the number and size of
metastases.
For patients who relapse within 6 months after
oxaliplatin-based adjuvant therapy (potentially resistant to
this treatment and often with a persistent sensitive neuropathy), an MDT discussion of the optimal individual
strategy is required. If a preoperative strategy is chosen,
treatment selection should reﬂect this situation and the
‘best available systemic treatment’ should be used.
Potentially resectable metastatic disease, conversion
therapy. The addition of a targeted agent to a cytotoxic
doublet or triplet is the most effective treatment in mCRC.
For efﬁcacy assessment, overall response rate (ORR) seems
to be the best parameter in direct and cross-trial
comparisons.
Anti-EGFR mAbs in RAS-wt patients with left-sided primary tumours are more effective than bevacizumab-based
combinations.43,44
According to cross-trial comparisons, LVe5-FUeoxaliplatineirinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) with and without bevacizumab
also resulted in high ORRs.45-47
In patients with RAS-mutant disease, a cytotoxic triplete
bevacizumab and, to a lesser extent, a cytotoxic doublete
bevacizumab are considered the best choice in patients
who may tolerate this intensive approach.
Resection of the metastases should be carried out 3-4
weeks from the previous administration of ChT alone or
ChTeanti-EGFR mAbs, or at least 5 weeks after ChTe
bevacizumab (if bevacizumab has not been omitted from
the last cycle). It should be carried out as soon as the
metastases, as a result of size reduction, are technically
resectable, since unnecessarily prolonged administration of
ChT may lead to increased liver toxicity and thus, higher
post-operative morbidity.36
Surgery following systemic treatment could be more
challenging than for initially resectable patients. Speciﬁc
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

13

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology
techniques, such as portal embolisation, resection combined
with radiofrequency ablation (RFA)/microwave ablation
(MWA) or two-stage hepatectomy, may be applied further.
Also, patients unresponsive to ﬁrst-line ChT should not be
denied liver resection since the outcome of resected patients
after second-line ChT could also be favourable. This approach
needs frequent assessment of response to indicate surgery at
the right moment. Intra-arterial ChT could be an option in
such patients, to both recover a response and to achieve liver
resection.48,49 The management of these patients requires a
particular dedication and expertise within the team.50,51
After surgery, re-uptake of the previous systemic treatmentdwith the same regimendcan be considered, speciﬁcally if pathological response has occurred, but there is
no evidence from randomised studies to support this
approach. Generally, the total treatment duration should
not exceed 6 months. New approaches, such as intraarterial post-operative adjuvant treatments, are currently
under investigation in randomised studies.52
LTs in management of patients with oligometastatic
disease
Management of oligometastatic disease. The deﬁnition of
oligometastatic disease (OMD) is important as treatment
strategies should be based on the possibility of achieving
eradication of all metastases and/or a ‘no evidence of disease’ (NED) status, either initially or after systemic therapy.
Generally, a traditional clinical deﬁnition of OMD is:
 One to ﬁve metastatic lesions, occasionally more if complete eradication is possible
 Up to two metastatic sites
 Controlled primary tumour (optionally resected)
 All metastatic sites must be safely treatable by LT
OMD status has therefore been established by radiological appearances and clinical judgment. Currently, biological
factors do not contribute to this deﬁnition, but this may
change considering, for example, molecular subtypes with
speciﬁc prognostic background and/or treatment implications. Notably, OMD status can occur in multiple clinical
scenarios in the continuum of care, e.g. during different
treatment lines. Therefore, careful and continuous reassessment is recommended.
Consideration should be given to relevant factors in the
OMD setting:
 Disease-related factors, e.g. size, number and localisation
of metastatic sites, status of primary tumour, previous
treatment-free intervals, previous treatments and their
respective outcome, overall prognosis
 Surgery and other LT-related factors, e.g. technical ability
to treat and/or to achieve a locally complete eradication.
This must be discussed versus potential toxicity and the
invasiveness of the technique and the alternatives
(mostly, continuation or initiation of systemic treatment)
 Patient-related factors, e.g. PS, frailty and comorbidity,
ﬁtness for systemic treatment and LT, individual treatment goals and preferences
14

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

Assessment for LT of OMD must include an optimal imaging strategy before LT: generally, a contrast-enhanced CT
scan, with MRI, ultrasound, PET and others. Specialist MDT
input and thorough patient assessment and counselling are
warranted.
The selection of the best LT for OMD differs according to:
 The size, number and localisation of the metastases
 The expected likelihood of complete eradication
 The invasiveness of the chosen technique
 The local expertise with regard to the use of a particular
LT method
 Consideration of patient frailty, life expectancy and
preferences
The integration of LT into the therapeutic continuum of
care can be:
 As a deﬁnitive eradication in limited disease. Usually, surgery will be used for this goal, but a nonsurgical LT only if
tumour characteristics (e.g. localisation) and/or patient
factors would limit the surgical approach.
 As a replacement for surgery; mostly in prognostically
unclear situations or after response to systemic treatment in more widespread disease.
 As a primary or metastasis-speciﬁc treatment to halt
further dissemination. This could delay (or even eliminate) the need for systemic treatment. This can be
used as an initial treatment for slowly progressing
tumours.
 As a consolidative treatment, following systemic therapy
to delay or pause further treatment.
OMD should be considered a speciﬁc situation in mCRC
treatment. OMD management will, generally, in most cases
start with induction ChT treatment, with response (or at
least disease stabilisation) being a strong predictor for a
favourable prognosis, justifying the enhanced local control
by LT. However, in favourable prognostic situations with
limited metastatic spread, upfront LT (without preceding
systemic therapy) is a standard of care. LT is an option in
oligo-progressive disease (i.e. very limited recurrence/nonresponse in a patient receiving systemic treatment). Such
OMD could be construed as a result of intra-tumour heterogeneity. The aim of LT here is to eliminate the cell clones
no longer responding to treatment and to enable the
continuation of the systemic therapy.
Intent of treatment and choice of LT
Curative treatment approaches. A complete eradication
of tumour can be obtained using surgical R0 resection and/
or A0 ablation (evidence of ablation margins and NED at
follow-up imaging). For patients with OMD conﬁned to a
single organ (most frequently liver or lung), or a few organs
or sites (pre-dominantly visceral metastases, e.g. liver and
lung), a potentially curative approach exists. In this setting,
long-term survival or even cure can be attained in 20%-45%
of patients who undergo complete R0 resection or complete A0 TA of their metastases.53-55
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

In the absence of randomised trials comparing surgical
with nonsurgical disease management, surgery has
remained the standard treatment approach for patients
with resectable OMD. However, TA and radiotherapy achieve high rates of complete tumour eradication of small
metastases and can be seen as alternatives if a widely
invasive surgical approach is required.55-58
Patients with liver and lung metastases have a better
prognosis than those with other metastatic disease locations. For example, as limited lung metastases are associated with slower growth and prolonged survival, a ‘watch
and wait’ strategy with regular surveillance imaging may
also be appropriate.59,60 The data showing different outcomes depending on the site(s) of OMD are likely to reﬂect
molecular differences. Selection of the best ‘situationadapted’ treatment strategy should consider all of these
factors as part of an MDT treatment decision before the
start of systemic treatment and at the time of best
response.
Use of LT with non-curative intent. For patients with
more extensive disease, the value of an LT may contribute
to long-term survival or a prolonged PFS, but is rarely
curative.61 Here, LT is part of a multimodal therapy
approach to provide well-controlled sites of metastases
with optional discontinuation of systemic therapy, with the
goal of long-term disease control and potentially improved
OS. For example, the reported median ChT-free survival
after TA of lung metastases from CRC was 12.2 months in
the overall population and 20.9 months in lung-only metastases patients.62
Modalities for LT in OMD. Modalities for LT are summarised in Figure 1. Management of OMD is outlined in
Supplementary Figure S1, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003.

Surgery. Treatment should aim to achieve complete
resection of all tumour masses, using surgical resection
and/or nonsurgical interventions.
For patients with resectable OMD conﬁned to a single
organ (most frequently liver or lung) and/or a few organs
(and even localised peritoneal spread), surgery remains the
standard and best (potentially) curative treatment
approach. Operative resection of metastases must be seen
in the context of prognostic information and technical
limitations.
Local ablation techniques. Thermal ablation. TA such as
RFA has a limitation inherent to size range of maximum 2-3
cm.63 Safety margin of ablation is a strong predictor of
complete eradication.55,64 In the randomised phase II
CLOCC trial (ChT plus RFA  surgical resection versus ChT
alone, for patients with a median of four CRLMs), an
improvement in PFS and in OS was reported.65
Data on the use of TA in combination with liver resection
in an effort to obtain NED demonstrate improved perioperative outcomes without compromising long-term survival
compared with bilateral resection.36,66 Data on TAs other
than RFA are limited, but outcome appears similar between
RFA and MWA, with ablative margins predictive for complete eradication of the targeted disease with both technologies, and a possible better control of perivascular
tumours with MWA.55
A meta-analysis supports surgery to provide better local
control and longer OS for CRLMs.67 Reported differences
were due to limitations of TA technologies, operator
experience and insufﬁcient safety margins applied, or subject to possible patient selection bias. TA applied to patients
who previously beneﬁtted from surgery improves liverspeciﬁc PFS,65 leading to the utilisation of RFA as a valid
treatment option for recurrent disease after surgical

Local treatment for mCRC

Local ablation treatment

Radiofrequency
ablationa [II, B]

Surgery

Intra-arterial therapies

SBRT [III, B]

TARE/SIRT [III, B]

HAIC [III, B]

TACE [III, B]

Figure 1. Local treatment of CRC metastases. Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; red: surgery; dark green: radiotherapy; blue: systemic anticancer therapy;
white: other aspects of management.
CRC, colorectal cancer; CRLM, colorectal liver metastasis; HAIC, hepatic arterial infusion chemotherapy; mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; OMD, oligometastatic
disease; SBRT, stereotactic body radiotherapy; SIRT, selective internal radiotherapy; TA, thermal ablation; TACE, transarterial chemoembolisation; TARE, transarterial
radioembolisation.
a
In patients with unresectable CRLMs only, or OMD in the liver,TA can be considered for small metastases [III, B]. In patients with lung-only metastases or OMD including lung
lesions, TA may be considered along with resection, according to tumour size, number, location, the extent of lung parenchyma loss, comorbidity or other factors [III, B].

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

15

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology
resection in small CRLMs.68-71 Randomised clinical trials are
ongoing to accurately assess surgery versus TA in CRLMs
(COLLISION study).
TA techniques also have proven efﬁcacy in the ablation of
lung metastases: local control rates of 88%-94% at 1 year and
77%-90% at 3 years have been reported.54,56,72,73 Similarly,
margins and volume of ablation are more predictive of
complete tumour eradication than type of TA used.74 Mortality and major complication rates may be as low as 1%.75 A
systematic review concluded that a ﬁrm conclusion could
not be drawn with regard to the use of surgery or RFA.76
SBRT. High conformal hypo-fractionated SBRT of metastases has been reported with a large range of local control
rates of 31%-90% after 2 years, including 80% for liver and
lung metastases, but also for lymph nodes.57,58 The risk of
failure correlates with tumour size as well as biologically
effective dose and motion management both for lung and
CRLMs.77-79 Across several series, no grade 3 events were
recorded. SBRT is considered an effective and safe ablative
treatment, but with no large prospective study available.
Therefore, with the beneﬁt of short treatment time, lack of
a need for recovery and favourable overall toxicity proﬁle,
SBRT is a treatment option, although it is yet unclear which
patients beneﬁt most. The OLIVER trial (NCT03296839) aims
to evaluate the impact of SBRT versus ChT alone, while
another randomised trial aims to compare MWA and SBRT
for inoperable CRLMs (NCT02820194).
Intra-arterial
therapies.
Transarterial
chemoembolisation. The data on transarterial chemoembolisation
(TACE) for CRLMs are mostly related to the use of
irinotecan-based drug-eluting microspheres (DEBIRI),
including two randomised studies. Despite signiﬁcant limitations in design and analysis of both, DEBIRI compared
with LVe5-FUeirinotecan (FOLFIRI) resulted in statistically
signiﬁcant improved OS and PFS,80 whereas FOLFOXebevacizumabeDEBIRI (FOLFOXeDEBIRI) reported improved
response rate (RR), downsizing to resection and PFS
compared with FOLFOXebevacizumab.81 In the neoadjuvant setting, DEBIRI is reported as safe and feasible,
yielding pathological major or complete response in >77%
of targeted lesions.82 A review of DEBIRI data, including 850
patients reported ORR of 56.2% and median PFS and OS of
8.1 and 16.8 months, respectively.83 In the chemorefractory setting, a new microspheres/irinotecan formulation demonstrated an ORR of 83% and median OS (mOS) of
14 months.84
Transarterial radioembolisation/selective internal radiation therapy. Transarterial radioembolisation (TARE)/
selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) typically involves
a single delivery of a radionuclide [yttrium (Y)-90, or holmium-166],85,86 connected to either resin or glass particles,
or bio-resorbable poly (L-lactic acid) microspheres as a delivery platform into the hepatic artery with the therapeutic
effect essentially limited to irradiation.
For patients with liver-limited metastases failing the
available chemotherapeutic options, TARE with Y-90 resin
16

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

microspheres has prolonged time to tumour progression
and time to liver progression, in a small, randomised
study.87
However, aggregated data of >1000 patients treated
within three randomised studies failed to show a beneﬁt in
OS,88 when TARE was added to the ﬁrst cycle of an
investigator-determined ‘best systemic treatment’. A randomised phase III study of TARE with resin microspheres failed
to show an overall PFS (as primary endpoint) beneﬁt, whilst a
signiﬁcantly better ‘liver-speciﬁc-PFS’ was documented.89 In
this trial, 45% of patients had the primary tumour in place and
40% had extrahepatic disease, suggesting that TARE may be
most beneﬁcial in patients with liver-limited or liverpredominant disease. Another potential subgroup with a
distinct beneﬁt is patients with right-sided primary
tumour.88,90
A recent further phase III trial compared second-line ChT
alone with second-line ChT plus transarterial Y-90 glass
microspheres in 428 patients with liver-dominant or liveronly disease (EPOCH trial). A signiﬁcant improvement in
PFS (as primary endpoint) was documented and ORRs were
21.1% and 34.0% for ChT alone and ChT plus TARE,
respectively. A subgroup analysis suggested PFS beneﬁt may
be more dominant in patients with fewer than three lesions, resected primary tumour, lower tumour burden, left
primary tumour location (PTL) and a KRAS mutation.
Hepatic arterial infusion ChT. Hepatic arterial infusion
ChT (HAIC) is carried out through intra-arterial ports or
pumps placed surgically or percutaneously.91 The most
commonly used drugs are ﬂoxuridine (FUDR) and
oxaliplatin, infused through ports. The European experience
is mostly linked with intra-arterial oxaliplatin over 2 h and
systemic 5-FUeLV delivered over 48 h. HAIC with oxaliplatin
demonstrated 62% ORR in heavily pre-treated patients with
more than ninefold higher complete pathological response
than systemic therapy.92,93 The phase II OPTILIV study with
HAIC with irinotecaneoxaliplatine5-FU combined with
intravenous (i.v.) cetuximab met its primary endpoint of
conversion to R0-R1 (microscopic tumour at the margin)
hepatectomy in 29.7% of 64 RAS-wt pre-treated patients
bearing a median of 10 CRLMs involving six segments of the
liver.49
Recommendations
Treatment of potentially resectable mCRC
 In patients with resectable metastases and with favourable prognostic criteria and a good surgical approach,
perioperative systemic treatment may not be needed
[III, B].
 In patients with resectable metastases, the use of perioperative oxaliplatin-based ChT is recommended where
the prognostic situation is unclear [II, B].
 Anti-EGFR mAbs in left-sided RAS-wt patients should be
used as conversion therapy, when complete resection is
the aim [II, A].
 In patients with right-sided and RAS-mutant disease,
FOLFOXIRIebevacizumab and, to a lesser extent, a
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

cytotoxic doubletebevacizumab should be considered
the best choice depending on patients’ ability to tolerate
triplet ChT [II, A].
 Patients unresponsive to ﬁrst-line ChT should not be denied resection or ablation of metastases since the
outcome of resected patients after second-line treatment could be also favourable. Intra-arterial ChT could
be an option in such patients, not only to recover a
response but also to achieve liver resection [III, C].
 In case of a peritoneal metastasis only, complete cytoreductive surgery should be carried out [II, A]. The addition
of HIPEC can be considered as an experimental procedure,
still to be validated in clinical trials. Therefore, its use
cannot be recommended outside of this setting [II, D].
Intent and choice of local treatment
 Treatment approaches for all patients with mCRC should
be discussed within an MDT of experts (especially in LT)
who meet regularly to review OMD cases [V, A].
 LT can be used as a primary or metastasis-speciﬁc treatment to halt further dissemination, and/or following systemic therapy as a consolidation treatment, to delay or
pause further treatment [III, C].
 Frequent radiological re-evaluations of the potential
applicability of surgery or other LT techniques should
be carried out, generally every 8-12 weeks [IV, A].
Local ablation treatment
 In patients with unresectable CRLMs only, or OMD in
the liver, TA can be considered for small metastases
[III, B].
 TA is a valid treatment option for recurrent disease after
surgical resection for small CRLMs [II, B].
 In patients with lung-only metastases or OMD including
lung lesions, TA may be considered along with resection,
according to tumour size, number, location, the extent
of lung parenchyma loss, comorbidity or other factors
[III, B].
 SBRT is a treatment option, although it is yet unclear
which patients beneﬁt most [III, B].
Intra-arterial therapies
 TACE, TARE/SIRT and HAIC may be also considered as
treatment options with non-curative intent [III, B].
 SIRT, HAIC and chemoembolisation of CRLMs in earlier
treatment lines may be interesting as ‘consolidation
treatment’ but should be limited to clinical trials [V, D].
MANAGEMENT OF ADVANCED AND METASTATIC DISEASE
WITHOUT POTENTIAL CONVERSION
An MDT discussion would be advisable to decide the best
treatment approach for each individual patient, taking into
consideration several factors that were established in the
2016 ESMO Consensus guideline (see Supplementary
Table S3, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.
2022.10.003), such as clinical presentation (impending
symptoms at diagnosis, PTL), histology and molecular
biology of the tumour, the patient characteristics (age, PS,
comorbidities, socioeconomic factors), the goal of
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

treatment and treatment-related issues [toxicity, quality of
life (QoL), etc.].94 When considering the best treatment
option for patients with mCRC, all of the above-mentioned
factors and medical history must be taken into
consideration.
Frail patients will not tolerate combination therapies with
potential side-effects. In these patients, the main treatment
goal is maintaining QoL and improving symptoms. These
patients could instead receive lower toxicity therapies, such
as ﬂuoropyrimidine as monotherapy or combined with
bevacizumab, or anti-EGFR mAbs in left-sided RAS-wt tumours. The 2016 ESMO consensus guideline established
that the initial consideration for treatment stratiﬁcation was
whether patients were ‘ﬁt’ or ‘unﬁt’.94
Age alone is not a contraindication of combined therapy,
for a patient with good ﬁtness, organ function and without
signiﬁcant comorbidities. A complete geriatric assessment
to consider all the factors that can affect treatment tolerance and compliance is advisable.95,96
Tumour characteristics are critical, for both prognosis
and predicted response to the available treatments. The
tumour burden, location of the metastases (involving one
or more organs) and the primary tumour, or impending
symptoms related to the primary tumour (haemorrhage
or intestinal obstruction), will guide the treatment
strategy.
The PTL and mutational status of the tumour is key to
decide the best treatment approach, as described above.
The location of the primary tumour proximal to the splenic
ﬂexure also has prognostic implications, with a shorter
survival related both to the nature of the tumour, metastatic sites, and to a poor response to treatment with ChT
and mAbs. It must be stressed that those right colon tumours, in general, beneﬁt less in terms of PFS and OS from
treatment with anti-EGFR mAbs, compared with tumours
located distal to the splenic ﬂexure.22 Nevertheless, RRs are
similar for both tumour locations.
The historical ESMO classiﬁcation of patients in four
groups according to the treatment goals has evolved (see
Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003).97 Treatment goals for ﬁt patients differ according to different scenarios (see
Supplementary Table S5, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003): (i) cure, generally achieved
through surgery, in those cases of OMD localised to liver,
lung and other solitary organs, (ii) to achieve a good
response and downstaging with ChT, allowing treatment
with curative intent in initially unresectable disease and (iii)
improving tumour-related symptoms, delaying progression
and prolonging survival in metastatic disease not amenable
to deﬁnitive surgical treatment or LTs despite response and
all while maintaining QoL. In the third group of patients, the
continuum of care concept demonstrates that sequencing
of all the different treatment options results in prolonged
disease control and improved survival.98 Liver transplantation is emerging as an experimental option for patients with CRLMs but results of randomised studies are still
pending.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

17

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology
First-line treatment
Proposed ﬁrst-line treatment strategies are shown in
Figure 2.
Cytotoxic agents. 5-FU is the backbone of mCRC treatment.
Most ﬁrst- and second-line clinical trials have explored
different combinations based on ﬂuoropyrimidines, both i.v.
5-FU (as bolus or as continuous infusion, with a different
toxicity proﬁle) or oral capecitabine; these are considered
equivalent.99,100 S-1 (tegafuregimeracileoteracil) is an
alternative ﬂuoropyrimidine when i.v. 5-FU or capecitabinebased ChT cannot be used due to cardiotoxicity and/or
hand-foot syndrome.101
The addition of oxaliplatin and/or irinotecan to a ﬂuoropyrimidine improves RR and survival.102,103 Both doublets, FOLFOX and FOLFIRI, are considered to be equally

effective and the selection in the ﬁrst-line can be guided by
their different toxicity proﬁles and the biological added to
enhance efﬁcacy. Capecitabine is more frequently combined
with oxaliplatin (CAPOX) and less frequently with irinotecan
(CAPIRI) because CAPIRI has a more toxic proﬁle than
FOLFIRI.104 A dose-modiﬁed CAPIRI schedule showed a
more favourable toxicity proﬁle.105 The triplet FOLFOXIRI
has improved RRs and survival compared with FOLFIRI, but
side-effects limit its applicability to selected ﬁt patients
without signiﬁcant comorbidities.45
Several trials have explored delivering treatment with
ﬂuoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin and irinotecan either
sequentially or in combination in ﬁrst or later lines of
treatment, showing that both strategies achieved
similar OS.106-108 This observation conﬁrmed that ﬁrstline treatment with a ﬂuoropyrimidine, as a single

Stage IV unresectable mCRC: first-line therapy

Comorbidities and
metastatic disease not
amenable to curative
treatment

Frail and elderly patients

Fluoropyrimidine±
bevacizumaba [I, B]

Fluoropyrimidine±
bevacizumaba [I, B]

RAS-wt and BRAF-wt

LEFT COLON
ChT doublet–
anti-EGFRa,b,d,e [I, A]

RAS-wt:
ChT–anti-EGFRa,b [I, A]
or
Anti-EGFR alonec [IV, C]

RIGHT COLON
Preferred:
ChT doublet±
bevacizumaba,b,d,f,g
[II, B] or
ChT triplet±
bevacizumaba,b,d,g,h [I, B]

RAS-mut

BRAF-mut

dMMR/MSI-H

ChT doublet±
bevacizumaba,b,d,f,g
or
ChT triplet±
bevacizumaba,b,f,g,h [I, B]

LEFT COLON
ChT doublet±
bevacizumaba,b,d,f,g [I, B]

Pembrolizumab
[I, A; MCBS 4i;
ESCAT I-Aj]

RIGHT COLON
ChT doublet±
bevacizumaba,d,g or triplet±
bevacizumaba,g,h [II, B]

Only if tumour shrinkage
is the aim:
ChT doublet–
anti-EGFRa,b,d,e [I, C]

Non-progression

Maintenance therapy:
see Figure 3

PD

PD

Second-line therapy:
see Figure 4

PD

Third-line therapy and
beyond: see Figure 5

Figure 2. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC in ﬁrst-line therapy. Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white:
other aspects of management.
5-FU, 5-ﬂuorouracil; ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, deﬁcient mismatch repair; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO
Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FOLFIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileirinotecan; FOLFOX, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileoxaliplatin; FOLFOXIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileoxaliplatineirinotecan; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; mCRC, metastatic colorectal
cancer; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; mut, mutant; PD, progressive disease; PS, performance status; S-1, tegafuregimeracileoteracil; wt, wild-type.
a
In patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or hand-foot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1 may be used as an alternative [III, B].
b
Additional details on treatments and drug combinations can be found under the section ‘Management of advanced and metastatic disease without potential conversion’ (subsections ‘First-line treatment’ and ‘Second-line treatment’).
c
In frail or elderly patients unable to tolerate ChT whose tumours are left-sided and RAS-wt.
d
FOLFIRIecetuximab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; FOLFOX4epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; mFOLFOX6epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3.i
e
FOLFOX4epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; modiﬁed FOLFOX6epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; for FOLFIRIecetuximab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4.i
f
In a very selected population.
g
CAPOXe or FOLFOX4ebevacizumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1.i
h
A triplet with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab is an option for selected patients with good PS and without comorbidities [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2].i
i
ESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working
Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
j
ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.164 See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, for more information on ESCAT scores.

18

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

agent, is a reasonable option, particularly in frail
patients.
Biological targeted agents. Several targeted agents against
EGFR (cetuximab and panitumumab) or against the vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) pathway (bevacizumab
and ramucirumab, or the protein aﬂibercept) have
demonstrated improved outcomes when combined with
ChT, or as a monotherapy in the case of anti-EGFR mAbs.
Anti-EGFR. Two different anti-EGFR mAbs have demonstrated activity in mCRC as monotherapy or combined with
ChT. Cetuximab is a chimeric anti-EGFR mAb, which has
demonstrated effectiveness in different lines of treatment,
as has panitumumab, a humanised anti-EGFR mAb.109,110
Both treatments can produce characteristic skin toxicity,
which must be properly managed with antibiotics and
topical corticosteroids.111
The presence of RAS mutations is associated with resistance to anti-EGFR mAbs and knowing the expanded RAS
mutational status is mandatory for use of both cetuximab
and panitumumab, avoiding anti-EGFR mAb treatment
when a RAS mutation is conﬁrmed.112,113
In the ﬁrst-line setting, FOLFIRIecetuximab was studied in a
non-selected population of mCRC patients.114 A retrospective
analysis demonstrated that only those patients without KRAS
exon 2 mutations had a signiﬁcantly reduced risk of disease
progression, improved OS and increased RR, compared with
those who received FOLFIRI alone, and a RAS expanded analysis conﬁrmed the beneﬁt in RR and survival.115
A combination of FOLFOX with or without panitumumab
was similarly studied in an initially non-selected population
of mCRC, although analysis of the mutational status was
completed in >90% of the patients. In the KRAS-wt
population, a statistically signiﬁcant improvement in PFS
and OS was observed with FOLFOX4epanitumumab.116 An
expanded RAS analysis, including mutations in KRAS exons
2, 3 and 4, NRAS exons 2, 3 and 4 and BRAF V600E, also
conﬁrmed the efﬁcacy of FOLFOXepanitumumab in the
RAS-wt population.112
Cetuximabeoxaliplatin in the ﬁrst-line setting was also
explored, showing a better RR and a trend toward an
improvement in PFS and OS in the RAS-wt population in a
randomised phase II study and better ORR, PFS and OS in a
Chinese phase III study.113,117
When a CAPOX combination was explored in addition to
cetuximab in the COIN trial, no signiﬁcant beneﬁt in terms
of PFS or OS was observed, with the exception of an
increased RR in the RAS-wt population treated with cetuximab.118 Moreover, the addition of cetuximab to
capecitabine-based therapy resulted in more diarrhoea and
skin toxicity, leading to a dose reduction/discontinuation of
the ChT schedule and a reduced exposure to ﬂuoropyrimidines. Combination with anti-EGFR mAbecapecitabinebased ChT is not recommended. FLOX (LVebolus 5-FUe
oxaliplatin)ecetuximab also failed to show any beneﬁt.
Therefore, anti-EGFRebolus 5-FU-based ChT is not
recommended.119
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

Tumour location is an important factor when deciding the
use of anti-EGFR mAbs in RAS-wt tumours. As mentioned
previously, the beneﬁt of anti-EGFR mAbs is very relevant in
left-sided tumours, with a signiﬁcant increase in RR and
relevant prolongation of PFS and OS.22 In right-sided
tumours no beneﬁt is observed for PFS and OS by the
addition of cetuximab or panitumumab, except an increase
in RRs. For this reason, a doublet or a triplet with
bevacizumab is the preferred option for patients with
right-sided tumours independently of the RAS mutational
status. Only in right-sided RAS-wt tumours, in which a good
response is needed, i.e. for conversion therapy, a doublet
with an anti-EGFR mAb can be selected. In frail or elderly
patients, unable to tolerate ChT, whose tumours are
left-sided and RAS-wt, monotherapy with anti-EGFR mAbs
may be an option.120 Combination of anti-EGFR mAb with
ChT cannot be recommended in BRAF-mutant tumours.
Anti-VEGF. In the ﬁrst-line setting of mCRC, the only antiangiogenic that has shown better outcomes in combination
with ChT is bevacizumab, a selective VEGF-A inhibitor. This
antiangiogenic has characteristic class-related side-effects
including increase in blood pressure and proteinuria and,
less frequently, arterial thrombosis, and an increased risk of
bleeding, intestinal perforation and wound healing delay,
which can be decreased with proper patient selection.
There are currently no biomarkers to identify which patients
may beneﬁt more from this treatment.
The addition of bevacizumab to capecitabine increased
PFS compared with capecitabine monotherapy and this
beneﬁt on PFS was conﬁrmed in patients 70 years old in
the AVEX phase III trial.121,122 No signiﬁcant differences in
OS were observed.
The addition of bevacizumab to an irinotecanebolus 5FUeLV (IFL) showed an improvement in OS, PFS and RR,
compared with IFLeplacebo.123 In the NO16966 phase III trial,
a 2  2 factorial design compared any ﬂuoropyrimidinee
oxaliplatin combination (CAPOX or FOLFOX4) with or
without bevacizumab or placebo, showing an improvement in
outcome, limited to PFS.124
The TRICOLORE phase III trial compared mFOLFOX6 or
CAPOX and bevacizumab with irinotecaneS-1 (IRIS)ebevacizumab,125 concluding that IRISebevacizumab is noninferior to mFOLFOX6e or CAPOXebevacizumab with
respect to PFS, with comparable OS.126
Anti-EGFR or anti-VEGF strategy in RAS-wt mCRC patients.
To address which targeted therapy would offer the greatest
beneﬁt when combined with ChT in the ﬁrst-line setting,
the FIRE-3 trial compared FOLFIRIebevacizumab with
FOLFIRIecetuximab, in KRAS (exon 2)-wt mCRC. No differences in the primary endpoint of ORR or in PFS were
observed. However, an OS improvement was observed with
cetuximab. A post hoc analysis showed a signiﬁcant proportion of patients achieved a better objective response,
early tumour shrinkage and median depth of response in
the extended RAS-wt population receiving FOLFIRIe
cetuximab.43
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

19

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology
A combined analysis of the FIRE-3 and CRYSTAL trials
conﬁrmed the beneﬁt in OS on left-sided tumours treated
with FOLFIRIecetuximab.127
The CALGB/SWOG 80405 trial also compared cetuximab
with bevacizumab, in combination with an investigator’s
choice ChT doublet (FOLFOX or FOLFIRI), in KRAS (exon 2)wt mCRC. No differences in the primary endpoint of OS
were observed between the study arms, suggesting that
both treatment strategies were equally effective in the ﬁrstline setting on KRAS-wt mCRC. The expanded RAS analyses
showed no differences in OS or PFS but an increased RR
with cetuximab.44
A subsequent exploratory retrospective analysis of
CALGB/SWOG 80405 trial examined the impact of PTL. Patients with left-sided KRAS-wt tumours treated with cetuximab had an increased OS and PFS; conversely, patients
with right-sided tumours treated with bevacizumab had an
increased OS, conﬁrming the limited beneﬁt of anti-EGFR
therapies on right-sided tumours.128
An exploratory phase II trial compared mFOLFOX6 with
panitumumab versus bevacizumab in patients with KRAS
exon 2-wt mCRC.129 The ﬁnal results conﬁrmed a beneﬁt in
PFS in the extended RAS-wt population treated with
FOLFOXepanitumumab, with no signiﬁcant differences in
OS.129 A phase III randomised trial (PARADIGM) comparing
both options resulted in a signiﬁcant beneﬁt in OS for the
FOLFOXepanitumumab arm in left-sided tumours, as well as
the whole population. The mOS was >36 months, conﬁrming
the beneﬁt of this therapy in the ﬁrst-line setting, although
most of the beneﬁt is driven by left-sided tumours.130
Combining anti-VEGF plus anti-EGFR mAbs is not superior
to ChTeanti-VEGF alone in terms of PFS, OS and RR.
Furthermore, it increases grade 3 and 4 adverse event rates,
and is therefore not recommended.131
Triplets. The strategy of combining the three active ChT
agents 5-FU, oxaliplatin and irinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) has
been explored in mCRC, with the main purpose of
improving tumour shrinkage (shown by RR), thus allowing a
complete resection of metastases, but increasing potential
toxicities.107,132 A phase III trial showed increased RRs and
greater R0 resection rates of metastases with the triplet
among patients with CRLMs only (36% versus 12%).
Moreover, PFS and OS were both signiﬁcantly improved
with FOLFOXIRI. These ﬁndings were not conﬁrmed in a
similar Greek phase III trial, which included PS2 patients.132
The addition to bevacizumab in both arms of the TRIBE
phase III trial conﬁrmed the higher efﬁcacy of triple ChT
backbone, with an improvement in PFS (median: 12.1
months in the tripletebevacizumab group and 9.7 months
with FOLFIRIebevacizumab) and in the ORR (65% versus
53%).46 Updated results conﬁrmed a beneﬁt in mOS.133
Within molecular subtypes, the largest mOS was 37.1
months in the RAS and BRAF V600E-wt subgroup, while the
BRAF-mutated group had the shortest survival with 13.4
months. Since no prospective trial has included comparison
with an arm with FOLFOXIRI without bevacizumab, the
contribution of bevacizumab is considered uncertain.
20

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

The TRIBE2 phase III study compared an upfront triplet
(FOLFOXIRI) followed by a planned maintenance plus the
reintroduction of the same regimen after disease progression, versus a sequence of mFOLFOX6 and FOLFIRI doublets,
each of the ChT regimens in combination with bevacizumab.
This approach favoured the triplet/maintenance/reintroduction strategy over sequential use for PFS2 (the interval
between randomisation and the date of second progression). No interaction was observed between treatment effect and RAS and BRAF V600E mutational status as shown
by the post hoc subgroup analyses of the TRIBE trial.134
Triplets including FOLFOXIRI should not be used in patients >75 years old, with PS2 or in patients with signiﬁcant
comorbidities. No phase III evidence supports the use of
anti-EGFR mAbs in combination with triplets, as shown in
the TRIPLETE trial,135 despite the initial beneﬁt in ORR in
the VOLFI phase II trial.136
First-line therapy in dMMR/MSI-H disease. The activity of
anti-programmed cell death protein 1 (PD-1) blockade
immunotherapy has been demonstrated on mCRC patients
with dMMR/MSI-H status. Phase II trials of nivolumab and
pembrolizumab, PD-1 ICIs, in dMMR/MSI-H mCRC patients
demonstrated beneﬁt in this small patient subgroup.137,138
In a pivotal phase III trial, 307 previously untreated
dMMR/MSI-H mCRC patients were randomised to receive
pembrolizumab (administered until progression or up to a
maximum of 2 years) or standard therapy (ChT plus targeted
agents, according to investigator’s choice). Pembrolizumab
demonstrated improvement in the primary endpoint of
PFS.12 Although no signiﬁcant differences in OS were
observed, this may be due to the high percentage of
crossover in the ChT arm (60% of patients progressing
received an ICI). Treatment-related adverse events of grade
3 occurred less frequently with pembrolizumab (22%),
compared with the ChT arm (66%). The QoL analysis also
favoured the use of pembrolizumab.139
Maintenance therapy
The concept of maintenance treatment has signiﬁcance for
patients with disease not amenable for surgery or LT (see
Figure 3). This describes de-escalation of treatment intensity,
resulting in improved side-effects and QoL, without relevantly
compromising therapeutic efﬁcacy and disease control. This
concept evolved from the need to limit the cumulative dose
of oxaliplatin cycles, with accumulative neurotoxicity; at that
point, the question arose of whether to maintain the
remainder or some of the drugs, or completely stop therapy.
Patient discussion is essential, explaining the beneﬁts and
risks of a maintenance approach.
Studies of maintenance strategies with continuation of
ﬂuoropyrimidines after induction ChT, or a complete ChT-free
interval, showed contradictory results. In the MRC COIN trial,
a combination of continuous oxaliplatineﬂuoropyrimidine
was compared with the same treatment followed by a ChTfree interval until progressive disease.118,134 This trial failed
to show non-inferiority of the intermittent ChT approach. The
OPTIMOX1 trial suggested that a maintenance strategy with
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

Stage IV unresectable mCRC: maintenance therapy

Previous therapy
(first line; see Figure 2)

Oxaliplatin-based ChT–bevacizumab

Oxaliplatin-based ChT–anti-EGFR

Non-progression after
>4 months treatment

Non-progression

Fluoropyrimidine–
bevacizumaba [I, B]

Fluoropyrimidine–anti-EGFRa [II, B]

FOLFIRI

Continue irinotecan full therapy until
progressive diseaseb [V, B]

PD

Reintroduction of induction therapy,
if initially successful [III, B]

PD

Second-line therapy: see Figure 4

Figure 3. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC with maintenance therapy. Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; blue: systemic anticancer therapy;
white: other aspects of management.
5-FU, ﬂuorouracil; ChT, chemotherapy; EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; FOLFIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileirinotecan, mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; PD,
progressive disease; S-1, tegafuregimeracileoteracil.
a
In patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or hand-foot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1 may be used as an alternative [III, B].
b
Due to the lack of a cumulative toxicity of FOLFIRI.

ﬂuoropyrimidines could be considered after induction ChT
with FOLFOX. However, the OPTIMOX2 trial explored short
induction FOLFOX7, followed by a maintenance strategy with
5-FUeLV or a ChT-free interval, conﬁrming the negative
impact of the ChT-free interval on the median duration of
disease control and survival.140
The role of biologicals in maintenance strategies was
tested. Bevacizumab maintenance was explored after ﬁrstline induction ChTebevacizumab in the SAKK 41/06 and
PRODIGE 9 phase III trials showing no differences in disease
control duration, concluding that single-agent bevacizumab
has no meaningful therapeutic value.141,142 In the CAIRO3
study, maintenance treatment with capecitabinee
bevacizumab was compared with a complete break,
showing an improvement in the primary endpoint of PFS2.143
In the AIO 0207 trial, after ﬁrst-line induction with oxaliplatinbased ChTebevacizumab, patients were randomly assigned
to either maintenance with ﬂuoropyrimidinesebevacizumab,
bevacizumab alone or observation. The primary endpoint was
to show non-inferiority for time to strategy failure with
bevacizumab alone compared with ﬂuoropyrimidineebevacizumab.144 Its results support ﬂuoropyrimidinee
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

bevacizumab as the preferable option. There are no phase
III data to support maintenance treatment with anti-EGFR
mAbs, although two phase II randomised trials have shown
that maintenance with 5-FUeanti-EGFR is better than 5-FU
or anti-EGFR alone.145,146
Second-line treatment
The beneﬁt of delivering second-line treatment to ﬁt patients with no signiﬁcant comorbidities has been demonstrated in multiple trials. Proposed treatment strategies in
the second line are shown in Figure 4. The ChT backbone
depends mainly on the ﬁrst-line treatment received. With
ﬁrst-line oxaliplatin-based therapy, second-line treatment
with irinotecan with ﬂuoropyrimidine or monotherapy
would be advisable. Conversely, those treated with ﬁrst-line
irinotecan-based could receive oxaliplatin-based treatment
(FOLFOX or CAPOX) in second line if no contraindications.
Anti-EGFR. The anti-EGFR mAbs cetuximab and panitumumab have demonstrated activity in the second-line (or
later-line) treatment of mCRC in RAS-wt tumours, as single
agents and in combination with ChT. The EPIC phase III trial
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

21

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

Stage IV unresectable mCRC: second-line therapy

Previous therapy
(first line: see Figure 2;
maintenance: see Figure 3)

Oxaliplatin-based ChT

Irinotecan-based ChT

Irinotecan–
fluoropyrimidine-based
ChT alone

Any type of therapy

PD
PD

FOLFIRI–bevacizumab
[I, A]

Irinotecan-based
combination or
monotherapy [II, A]

Oxaliplatin–based ChT a,c
[II, A]

PD

PD

FOLFOX–bevacizumaba,d
[I, A]

Antiangiogenic–ChT a,e
[I, A]

Alternative:
FOLFIRI–aflibercept
or
FOLFIRI–ramucirumaba
[I, A; MCBS 1b]

Molecular alteration

RAS-wt Anti-EGFR naive

BRAF V600E-mut

dMMR/MSI-H

PD

PD

PD

LEFT COLON
FOLFIRI or irinotecan with cetuximab or
panitumumaba [II, C]

Encorafenib–cetuximab
[I, A; MCBS 4b;
ESCAT I-A f]

Ipilimumab–nivolumabg
[III, B; MCBS 3b]

RIGHT COLON
Anti-angiogenic with ChT a [II, B]

Figure 4. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC in the second line. Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; blue: systemic anticancer therapy; white: other
aspects of management.
5-FU, ﬂuorouracil; CAPOX, capecitabineeoxaliplatin; ChT, chemotherapy; dMMR, deﬁcient mismatch repair; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for
Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug Administration; FOLFIRI, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracileirinotecan; FOLFOX, leucovorine5-ﬂuorouracile
oxaliplatin; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; mCRC, metastatic colorectal cancer; MSI-H, microsatellite instability-high; mut, mutant; PD, progressive
disease; PTL, primary tumour location; S-1, tegafuregimeracileoteracil; wt, wild-type.
a
In patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or hand-foot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1 may be used as an alternative [III, B].
b
ESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working
Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
c
FOLFOX or CAPOX, if no contraindications.
d
Bevacizumab can be combined with ChT doublet (a ﬂuoropyrimidine with oxaliplatin or irinotecan, depending on the ﬁrst-line ChT backbone delivered) [I, A; ESMOMCBS v1.1 score: 1].
e
With or without previous ﬁrst-line treatment with bevacizumab and independently of RAS mutational status and the PTL.
f
ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.164 See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, for more information on ESCAT scores.
g
Indicated for immunotherapy-naive patients.

explored second-line treatment with irinotecan, with or
without cetuximab, in patients refractory to ﬁrst-line oxaliplatineﬂuoropyrimidine-based treatment.147 While OS
was not increased, almost half of the control arm received
cetuximab post-progression and this addition of cetuximab
improved PFS and RR.147
Second-line FOLFIRI with or without panitumumab was
tested in a phase III trial.148 In KRAS-wt patients, panitumumab signiﬁcantly improved RR and PFS with a nonsigniﬁcant trend toward longer OS.
Anti-VEGF. In patients previously treated with irinotecane
ﬂuoropyrimidine-based ChT alone, a combination of
22

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

FOLFOXebevacizumab demonstrated improved OS and PFS
in a phase III trial in comparison with FOLFOX4.149
In patients previously treated with bevacizumab (in the
ﬁrst-line setting), maintaining bevacizumab in combination
with second-line ChT (oxaliplatin or irinotecan-based,
switching depending on the ﬁrst-line treatment delivered)
demonstrated improvement in the primary endpoint of
OS.150
Aﬂibercept is a recombinant fusion protein that
blocks the activity of VEGF-A and B, as well as placental
growth factor, by acting as a high-afﬁnity ligand trap.
The VELOUR phase III trial reported improvement in OS
and PFS with aﬂibercept in combination with FOLFIRI, in
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

mCRC patients previously treated with oxaliplatin,
including the subgroup of patients previously treated
with bevacizumab.151
The RAISE phase III trial tested ramucirumab, a human
mAb that targets the extracellular domain of VEGF receptor
2, in combination with FOLFIRI in mCRC patients with disease progression during or after ﬁrst-line therapy with
bevacizumabeoxaliplatineﬂuoropyrimidines.152 A beneﬁt
in both OS and PFS was observed.
Each of these antiangiogenics in combination with ChT
has demonstrated improved OS in the second-line treatment of mCRC, irrespective of the ﬁrst-line treatment. In
case of RAS-mutated tumours with a rapid progression
while on bevacizumab ﬁrst-line treatment, second-line
therapy with ChT combined with aﬂibercept or ramucirumab could be considered, as those trials included patients
with a rapid progression while on ﬁrst-line treatment with
bevacizumab.
In RAS-wt patients treated upfront with bevacizumab,
second-line treatment with antiangiogenics or anti-EGFR
mAbs combined with ChT are good options. Treatment
with anti-EGFR mAbs can increase the RR, although the
beneﬁt is more extensive in left-sided tumours. In rightsided tumours a combination with ChT and an anti-VEGF
could be a better option. The side-effects proﬁle should
also be considered in this decision. In dMMR/MSI-H tumours progressing after ﬁrst-line ChT, the European Medicines Agency (EMA) approved the use of ipilimumabe
nivolumab.153
BRAF V600E-mutated mCRC. As described, the presence of
BRAF mutations is associated with a poor prognosis in
mCRC, and current therapies have demonstrated less
effectiveness in these patients. New strategies blocking
the BRAF signalling pathway have shown preliminary activity.154,155 A phase III study in BRAF-mutant patients
progressing after ﬁrst- or second-line treatment tested the
combination of encorafenib (an oral BRAF V600E inhibitor), with binimetinib and cetuximab.156 Patients were
randomly assigned (1 : 1 : 1) to receive encorafenibe
cetuximab with or without binimetinib (doublet or
triplet) versus ChT (FOLFIRI or irinotecan) plus cetuximab.
OS was signiﬁcantly superior in the experimental arms,
either doublet or triplet, compared with standard of care.
The mOS was 9.3 months in the experimental arms and
5.9 months in the control group. A conﬁrmed signiﬁcantly
better ORR was reported as 26.8% in the triplet arm,
19.5% in the doublet, versus 1.8% in the control group.
The QoL was not deteriorated in the experimental arm
and grade 3 adverse events reported were higher in the
standard arm (61%) compared with the doublet (50%) or
triplet treatment (58%). This study led to the approval of
encorafenibecetuximab for BRAF V600E pre-treated
mCRC; further studies are ongoing to test this combination in early phases of metastatic disease. Patients with
BRAF-mutant tumours and MSI-H status, who are
receiving ﬁrst-line immunotherapy, could also beneﬁt from
encorafenibecetuximab upon progression.
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

Third- and further-line treatment
Proposed treatment strategies for third and further lines are
shown in Figure 5.
Reintroduction of the initial induction therapy can be
considered after second-line therapy, in patients who did
not progress during the course of ﬁrst-line ChT.
Anti-EGFRs. Both cetuximab and panitumumab as single
agents have demonstrated activity in mCRC after previous
treatment with standard ChT. In comparison with best
supportive care (BSC), cetuximab monotherapy improved
OS and PFS, whilst preserving QoL with less deterioration in
physical function and global health status scores.110 Panitumumab was also compared with BSC in mCRC patients
who had been previously treated with standard ChT,
showing an increase in PFS and ORR. No difference in OS
was observed, probably due to crossover.109 This beneﬁt in
PFS as well as in OS was observed only in the KRAS-wt
population for both cetuximab and panitumumab.3,4 In
RAS-wt patients not previously treated with anti-EGFR
mAbs, in the third or further lines, a combination of
irinotecanecetuximab was superior to cetuximab monotherapy in ORR and PFS, but not in OS. Therefore, a combination of irinotecanecetuximab can be used in this
setting.157 Similarly, rechallenge with anti-EGFR mAbs has
shown initial good outcomes in RAS-wt patients according
to liquid biopsy testing in small non-randomised
studies.158,159
Regorafenib. Regorafenib is an oral multikinase inhibitor that
demonstrated activity in refractory mCRC in a phase III
placebo-controlled trial, showing an increase in mOS and PFS
over BSC.160 Another phase III trial conﬁrmed a beneﬁt on OS
with regorafenib in comparison with placebo. The most
common grade 3 adverse events were hand-foot syndrome,
hypertension, fatigue, diarrhoea, hyperbilirubinaemia,
increased liver enzymes and rash.161 This treatment could be
a possibility in ﬁt patients with refractory disease after
standard ChT with 5-FUeirinotecaneoxaliplatin, with or
without anti-VEGF therapies or anti-EGFR mAbs.
Triﬂuridineetipiracil (TAS-102). TAS-102 is an oral agent
that combines triﬂuridine, a thymidine-based nucleoside
analogue, with tipiracil hydrochloride, a novel thymidine
phosphorylase inhibitor that improves the bioavailability of
triﬂuridine. TAS-102 has demonstrated improved PFS and
OS in refractory mCRC in a phase III trial.162 The most
frequently observed adverse events are neutropaenia and
leukopaenia and, much less frequently, febrile neutropaenia. A similar phase III trial conﬁrmed a longer mOS
and a lower risk of death for those patients treated with
TAS-102 compared with placebo.163
HER2-positive mCRC. Ampliﬁcation of HER2 is a rare condition in mCRC. Therapies with HER2 blockade have shown
signiﬁcant antitumour activity: a dual blockade of HER2 with
a combination of trastuzumab, an anti-HER2 mAb and the
tyrosine kinase inhibitor lapatinib, in a population of patients with KRAS exon 2-wt and HER2-positive mCRC
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

23

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

Stage IV unresectable mCRC: third-line and beyond

PD

RAS-wt and BRAF-wt

RAS-mut

BRAF V600E-mut

PD

PD

PD

Single agent anti-EGFR mAbc
[I, A; panitumumab MCBS 3d]
or
Irinotecan–cetuximabc [II, B]

Regorafenib
[I, A; MCBS 1d]
or
Trifluridine–tipiracil
[I, A; MCBS 3d]

Encorafenib–cetuximabe
[I, A; MCBS 4d; ESCAT I-Ab]

HER2-positive

Anti-HER2 drugsa
[III, C; ESCAT II-Bb]

Figure 5. Management of stage IV unresectable mCRC in third-line therapy and beyond. Purple: general categories or stratiﬁcation; blue: systemic anticancer
therapy; white: other aspects of management.
EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor; EMA, European Medicines Agency; ESCAT, ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of Molecular Targets; FDA, Food and Drug
Administration; HER2, human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; mAb, monoclonal antibody; MCBS, ESMO-Magnitude of Clinical Beneﬁt Scale; mCRC, metastatic
colorectal cancer; mut, mutant; PD, progressive disease; wt, wild-type.
a
For a summary of recommended anti-HER2 regimens for mCRC see Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003.
b
ESCAT scores apply to genomic alterations only. These scores have been deﬁned by the guideline authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and
Precision Medicine Working Group.164 See Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003, for more information on ESCAT scores.
c
In RAS-wt patients not previously treated with anti-EGFR monoclonal antibodies.
d
ESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate scores for therapies/indications approved by the EMA or FDA. The scores have been calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working
Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee (https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/esmo-mcbs/esmo-mcbs-evaluation-forms).
e
Treatment for BRAF-mut patients if not used in the second line.

refractory to standard of care, led to an ORR (partial or
complete) of 30%, and disease stability in an additional 44%
of patients.14 A summary of HER2 blockade studies is provided in Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003.



Recommendations
First-line therapy
 Determining the RAS mutational status on a tumour biopsy [I, A] (or through a liquid biopsy in case no tumour
sample is available [II, B]) is mandatory to guide the best
treatment decision.
 Delivering a biological therapy in combination with ChT
in the ﬁrst-line setting is recommended, unless contraindicated [I, A].
 In the majority of patients, ﬁrst-line treatment will
consist of a doublet of ChT (FOLFOX, FOLFIRI, CAPOX)
that can be combined with an anti-VEGF or anti-EGFR
mAb [I, B; for FOLFIRIecetuximab ESMO-Magnitude of
Clinical Beneﬁt Scale (ESMO-MCBS) v1.1 score: 4;
FOLFOX4epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4;
modiﬁed FOLFOX6epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 3].
 In RAS-wt and BRAF-wt left-sided tumours, doublet ChT
plus an anti-EGFR mAb is the preferred option [I, A]. Due
24

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003









to increased side-effects and lack of efﬁcacy, combination with cetuximabecapecitabine or bolus 5-FU-based
ChT is not recommended [I, E].
In RAS-wt right-sided tumours, ChT  bevacizumab is the
preferred option [II, B]; although in cases in which a
higher response is needed for conversion therapy, a
doublet with cetuximab or panitumumab can be used
[II, C].
Anti-EGFR mAbs can be combined with the doublets
FOLFOX or FOLFIRI [I, A; FOLFOX4epanitumumab
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; modiﬁed FOLFOX6epanitumumab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3; for FOLFIRIecetuximab ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4].
Bevacizumab can be combined with single ﬂuoropyrimidines, irinotecan or oxaliplatin-based doublet of ChT
(FOLFOX, CAPOX, FOLFIRI) or triplets (FOLOXIRI) [I, B].
Combining anti-VEGF plus anti-EGFR mAbs is not recommended [I, E].
A triplet with FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab could also be
an option for selective patients with good PS and
without comorbidities [I, B; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 2].
Triplets including FOLFOXIRI should not be used in patients >75 years old, with PS2 or in patients with significant comorbidities [IV, E].
In selected cases, when downstaging is the objective or
in right-sided colon cancer with BRAF V600E mutations,
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.








Annals of Oncology

a triplet (FOLFOXIRI), which can be combined with bevacizumab, should be considered, but a doublet plus bevacizumab could provide similar outcomes [II, B].
Triplets with FOLFOXIRI and anti-EGFR mAbs are not recommended [I, D].
In patients with comorbidities, older age or with metastatic disease not amenable to a curative treatment
strategy and no signiﬁcant disease-related symptoms,
monotherapy with a ﬂuoropyrimidine  bevacizumab
can be used [I, B]. In frail or elderly patients unable to
tolerate ChT, whose tumours are left-sided and RAS-wt,
monotherapy with anti-EGFR mAbs can be considered
[IV, C].
In patients presenting with cardiotoxicity and/or handfoot syndrome on 5-FU or capecitabine-based ChT, S-1
may be used as an alternative [III, B].
Patients should receive all available treatments during
the course of the disease [I, B].
In dMMR/MSI-H mCRC patients, the ICI pembrolizumab
has demonstrated beneﬁt over standard ChT and targeted agents, in the ﬁrst-line setting and it is recommended as standard of care [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4;
ESCAT: I-A].

Maintenance therapy
 After ﬁrst-line therapy with ChT based on oxaliplatine
bevacizumab, maintenance therapy with a ﬂuoropyrimidine and bevacizumab could be considered in nonprogressive patients after at least 4 months of treatment
[I, B].
 After ﬁrst-line therapy with ChT based on oxaliplatin plus
anti-EGFR mAbs, maintenance therapy with a ﬂuoropyrimidine plus anti-EGFR mAbs could be considered in nonprogressive patients [II, B].
 When FOLFIRI is used in ﬁrst-line treatment, due to the
lack of a cumulative toxicity, we should continue irinotecan full therapy until progressive disease [V, B].
 Reintroduction of an initial successful induction therapy
should be done after progressive disease while on maintenance therapy [III, B].
Second-line treatment
 In patients treated with ﬁrst-line oxaliplatin-based therapy, second-line treatment with irinotecan-based or
monotherapy is recommended. On the contrary, those
patients treated with irinotecan-based in ﬁrst line could
receive an oxaliplatin-based treatment (FOLFOX or
CAPOX) in second line if no contraindications [II, A].
 In RAS-wt patients not previously treated with an antiEGFR mAb, treatment with ChT (FOLFIRI or irinotecan)
and cetuximab or panitumumab could be considered
for left-sided colon tumours [II, C]. For right-sided
tumours, second-line therapy with an anti-angiogenic
combined with ChT is recommended [II, B].
 In patients previously treated with irinotecaneﬂuoropyrimidine-based ChT alone, a combination of FOLFOXe
bevacizumab is recommended [I, A].

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

 A second-line treatment with an antiangiogenic combined with ChT, regardless of whether the ﬁrst-line treatment included bevacizumab or not, should be used,
independently of the RAS mutational status and the
PTL [I, A].
 Bevacizumab can be combined with a ﬂuoropyrimidinedoublet with oxaliplatin or irinotecan, depending on
the ﬁrst-line ChT backbone delivered [I, A; ESMO-MCBS
v1.1 score: 1].
 Aﬂibercept or ramucirumab in combination with FOLFIRI
could be used as an alternative to bevacizumab with
FOLFIRI in patients progressing on ﬁrst-line treatment
with oxaliplatin-based ChT [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 1].
 For BRAF V600E-mutated, pre-treated mCRC patients,
encorafenibecetuximab is recommended as the best option in second line [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4;
ESCAT: I-A].
 For dMMR/MSI-H tumours progressing after ﬁrst-line
ChT, ipilimumabenivolumab is recommended [III, B;
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score 3].
Third- and further-line treatment
 Reintroduction of the initial induction therapy can be
considered after second-line therapy, as long as the patient did not progress during the induction course of
ﬁrst-line ChT [III, B].
 Regorafenib is recommended in patients pre-treated
with ﬂuoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan and biologics, if available, or in earlier lines of therapy following
oxaliplatin and irinotecan regimen failure, depending on
local approvals [I, A, ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 1].
 Triﬂuridineetipiracil is recommended in patients pretreated with ﬂuoropyrimidines, oxaliplatin, irinotecan
and biologics, if available, or in earlier lines of therapy
following oxaliplatin and irinotecan regimen failure,
depending on local approvals [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1
score: 3].
 For BRAF V600E-mutated, pre-treated mCRC patients,
encorafenibecetuximab is recommended as the best option in third line [I, A; ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 4; ESCAT:
I-A].
 In RAS-wt and BRAF-wt patients not previously treated
with EGFR antibodies, cetuximab and panitumumab
are recommended as single agents [I, A; panitumumab
ESMO-MCBS v1.1 score: 3].
 In irinotecan-refractory patients, cetuximabeirinotecan
is recommended over cetuximab alone [II, B].
 Administering an alternative anti-EGFR antibody, if a patient is refractory to one of the other anti-EGFR antibodies, is not recommended [I, E].
 In patients maintaining RAS-wt status, rechallenge with
anti-EGFR mAbs may be an option in selected patients
[III, C].
 In HER2-positive patients with mCRC, treatment with
HER2 dual blockade is optionally recommended, especially in RAS-wt tumours [III, C; ESCAT: II-B].

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

25

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology
FOLLOW-UP, LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS AND
SURVIVORSHIP
The survivorship goals include physical evaluation and
management of the long-term toxicities related to surgery, LTs, ChT, targeted agents or immunotherapy. If the
patient is receiving an active treatment, radiological
evaluation should be carried out every 8-12 weeks,
including (in most cases) CT scan or MRI, as well as the
measurement of CEA levels. Patients with a radically
resected metastatic disease with potential for cure may
initially merit more intense monitoring with radiological
assessment with CT (or MRI) and measurement of CEA
levels every 3 months during the ﬁrst 2 years and every
6 months thereafter.19
Recommendations
 For patients receiving active treatment, radiological
evaluation should be carried out every 8-12 weeks,
including (in most cases) CT scan or MRI, as well as the
measurement of CEA levels [IV, B].
 Patients with a radically resected metastatic disease with
potential for cure merit more intense monitoring initially
with radiological assessment with CT (or MRI) and measurement of CEA levels every 3 months during the ﬁrst 2
years and every 6 months thereafter [I, A].
METHODOLOGY
This CPG was developed in accordance with the ESMO
standard operating procedures for CPG development
(https://www.esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Meth
odology). The relevant literature has been selected by the
expert authors. A table of ESCAT scores is included in
Supplementary Table S1, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003. ESCAT scores have been
deﬁned by the authors and validated by the ESMO Translational Research and Precision Medicine Working Group.164
A table of ESMO-MCBS scores is included in Supplementary
Table S7, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.
2022.10.003. ESMO-MCBS v1.1165 was used to calculate
scores for new therapies/indications approved by the EMA
or the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (https://www.
esmo.org/Guidelines/ESMO-MCBS). The scores have been
calculated by the ESMO-MCBS Working Group and validated by the ESMO Guidelines Committee. The FDA/EMA or
other regulatory body approval status of new therapies/
indications is reported at the time of writing this CPG.
Levels of evidence and grades of recommendation have
been applied using the system shown in Supplementary
Table S8, available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.
2022.10.003.166,167 Statements without grading were
considered justiﬁed standard clinical practice by the authors. For future updates to this CPG, including eUpdates
and Living Guidelines, please see the ESMO Guidelines
website: https://www.esmo.org/guidelines/guidelines-bytopic/gastrointestinal-cancers/metastatic-colorectal-cancer.

26

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Manuscript editing support was provided by Claire Bramley,
Catherine Evans and Richard Lutz (ESMO Guidelines staff).
Nathan Cherny, Chair of the ESMO-MCBS Working Group,
Urania Dafni and Giota Zygoura of Frontier Science Foundation Hellas provided review and validation of the ESMOMCBS scores. Nicola Latino (ESMO Scientiﬁc Affairs staff)
provided coordination and support of the ESMO-MCBS
scores and Angela Corstorphine of Kstorﬁn Medical Communications Ltd. provided medical writing and editing
support in the preparation of the ESMO-MCBS table; this
support was funded by ESMO. Dr Benedikt Westphalen and
Dr Noelia Tarazona (members of the ESMO Translational
Research and Precision Medicine Working Group) and Dr
Svetlana Jezdic (ESMO Medical Affairs Advisor) provided
validation support for ESCAT scores.
FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation
of this guideline. Production costs have been covered by
ESMO from central funds.
DISCLOSURE
AC reports fees paid to his institution as an invited speaker
from Amgen, Foundation Medicine, Merck Serono and
Roche; fees paid to his institution for advisory board
membership from Amgen, AnHeart Therapeutics, Merck
Serono, Roche and Transgene; personal fees for editorial
roles as Associate Editor for Annals of Oncology and ESMO
Open and as Editor for Cancer Treatment Reviews; institutional funding as principal investigator (PI) from Actuate
Therapeutic, Adaptimmune, Amcure, Amgen, Astellas,
AstraZeneca, Bayer, BeiGene, Bristol Myers Squibb (BMS),
FibroGen, Genentech, Lilly, MedImmune, Merck Serono,
Merck Sharp & Dohme (MSD), Natera, Novartis, Servier,
Sierra Oncology and Takeda; he reports a non-remunerated
role as General and Scientiﬁc Director of INCLIVA Biomedical Research Institute. RA reports personal fees as an
invited speaker from Merck Serono and Sanoﬁ. SR reports
personal fees as an invited speaker from Amgen, MSD and
Servier; personal fees for advisory board membership from
Amgen, Servier and Sirtex; institutional funding as a local PI
from Ability Pharmaceuticals, Astellas, G1 Therapeutics,
Hutchinson, Menarini, Mirati, Novartis, Pﬁzer, Pierre Fabre,
Roche and Seagen. DA reports personal fees as an invited
speaker from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Boston Scientiﬁc, BMS,
Ipsen, Merck Serono, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche, Samsung
Bioepis, Sanoﬁ (Genzyme), Servier and Terumo; personal
fees as an invited speaker and continued medical education
(CME) provider from ACE Oncology, Aptitude Health, Art
Tempi Media, Clinical Care Options, From Research to
Practice, Imedex, MedAhead (Austria), PRMA Consulting,
Streamitup (Germany), Tactic MD LLC, WebMD Health Corp;
personal fees for advisory board membership from AstraZeneca, Boston Scientiﬁc, BMS, CRA International, Ketchum,
MSD, Pierre Fabre, Samsung Bioepis, Sanoﬁ (Genzyme) and

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

Terumo; personal fees for advisory board membership, CME
provider and App producer from onkowissen; personal fees
for editorial roles as an Associate Editor for Annals of
Oncology, ESMO Open and Clinical Colorectal Cancer;
institutional funding from AbbVie and as a local PI from
BMS and Pierre Fabre, as a coordinating PI from OncoLytics
and as a Steering Committee member from Roche;
he reports fees paid to his institution as Chair of the
Data Safety Monitoring Board from Sanoﬁ (Genzyme);
non-remunerated activities as a project lead with OncoLytics, member of the American Society of Clinical Oncology
(ASCO), the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Hämatologie und
Medizinische Onkologie (DGHO), European School of
Oncology (ESO) and a leadership role and Steering Committee membership with the Arbeitsgemeinschaft Internistische Onkologie in der Deutschen Krebsgesellschaft
(AIO) and European Organisation for Research and Treatment of Cancer (EORTC) gastrointestinal group. NN reports
personal fees as an invited speaker from Eli Lilly, Illumina,
Merck, MSD and Thermo Fisher; personal fees for advisory
board membership from Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Biocartis, Incyte, Novartis and Roche; institutional funding from
AstraZeneca, Biocartis, Blueprint, Illumina, Incyte, Merck,
Qiagen, Roche and Thermo Fisher; and non-remunerated
activities as President of International Quality Network of
Pathology (IQN Path) and President of the Società Italiana di
Cancerologia (SIC). JT reports personal fees as an invited
speaker and for advisory board membership from Amgen,
BMS, Merck, MSD, Novartis, Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier; non-remunerated activities as Chair of the Aide et
Recherche en Cancérologie Digestive (ARCAD) Foundation
pancreas research group, president of the scientiﬁc committee for the ARCAD foundation and as member of the
administrative council, scientiﬁc committee, executive
board responsible for international relationships/partnerships for the Federation Francophone de Cancerologie
Digestive (FFCD) in the PRODIGE Intergroup for the FFCD. JS
reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Merck
Serono, Pierre Fabre and Servier; personal fees for advisory
board membership from Pierre Fabre, Ventana and Zentalis;
personal fees for consultancy and review of guidelines from
Roche Diagnostics; personal fees for CME activities from GI
Connect; personal fees for expert testimony from Seagen;
personal fees for travel expenses from BMS and Servier;
institutional funding from Pierre Fabre. TDB reports personal fees as an invited speaker from Boston Scientiﬁc and
GE Healthcare; personal fees for advisory board membership from Guerbet, Quantum Surgical and Terumo; institutional funding from Quantum Surgical and Terumo. PO
reports personal fees as an invited speaker from BMS Eisai,
Fresenius Kabi, Nordic Drugs, Novartis, Nutricia, Roche and
Servier; personal feels for advisory board membership from
Amgen, AstraZeneca, Bayer, Daiichi Sankyo (in collaboration
with AstraZeneca), Eisai, Incyte, Merck, MSD, Pierre Fabre,
Roche, Sanoﬁ and Sobi; and personal fees for expert testimony for the Finnish Medicines Agency from BMS; she reports institutional funding for research grants from Amgen
and Servier; as a local PI from Incyte and as a coordinating
Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

PI from Pﬁzer and Roche; she reports non-remunerated
activities as a member of the Colores patient advocacy
group and as a Board Member of the Finnish Cancer Society. TY reports personal fees as an invited speaker from
Bayer, Chugai, Merck Biopharma, MSD and Ono; institutional funding from Amgen, Boehringer Ingelheim, Chugai,
Daiichi Sankyo, Genomedia, MSD, Ono, Sysmex and Taiho
and as a local PI from Chugai, Daiichi Sankyo, Ono, Pﬁzer
and Sanoﬁ. EM reports personal fees as an invited speaker
from Bayer, ESMO, Incyte, Merck S.p.A., Merck Serono,
Pierre Fabre, Roche and Servier; personal fees for writing
engagements from AstraZeneca, Incyte, MSD, Pierre Fabre,
Roche and Servier; personal fees for advisory board membership from Amgen, Incyte, MSD, Pierre Fabre, Roche and
Servier.
REFERENCES
1. Sung H, Ferlay J, Siegel RL, et al. Global cancer statistics 2020:
GLOBOCAN estimates of incidence and mortality worldwide for
36 cancers in 185 countries. CA Cancer J Clin. 2021;71(3):209249.
2. Malvezzi M, Carioli G, Bertuccio P, et al. European cancer mortality
predictions for the year 2018 with focus on colorectal cancer. Ann
Oncol. 2018;29(4):1016-1022.
3. Amado RG, Wolf M, Peeters M, et al. Wild-type KRAS is required for
panitumumab efﬁcacy in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(10):1626-1634.
4. Karapetis CS, Khambata-Ford S, Jonker DJ, et al. K-ras mutations and
beneﬁt from cetuximab in advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2008;359(17):1757-1765.
5. Douillard JY, Siena S, Cassidy J, et al. Randomised, phase III trial of
panitumumab with infusional ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin
(FOLFOX4) versus FOLFOX4 alone as ﬁrst-line treatment in patients
with previously untreated metastatic colorectal cancer: the PRIME
study. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(31):4697-4705.
6. Normanno N, Esposito Abate R, Lambiase M, et al. RAS testing of
liquid biopsy correlates with the outcome of metastatic colorectal
cancer patients treated with ﬁrst-line FOLFIRI plus cetuximab in the
CAPRI-GOIM trial. Ann Oncol. 2018;29(1):112-118.
7. Maurel J, Alonso V, Escudero P, et al. Clinical impact of circulating
tumour RAS and BRAF mutation dynamics in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer treated with ﬁrst-line chemotherapy plus antiepidermal growth factor receptor therapy. JCO Precis Oncol. 2019;3:
1-16.
8. Bachet JB, Bouche O, Taieb J, et al. RAS mutation analysis in circulating tumour DNA from patients with metastatic colorectal cancer:
the AGEO RASANC prospective multicenter study. Ann Oncol.
2018;29(5):1211-1219.
9. Kopetz S, Grothey A, Yaeger R, et al. Encorafenib, binimetinib, and
cetuximab in BRAF V600E-mutated colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2019;381(17):1632-1643.
10. Schirripa M, Biason P, Lonardi S, et al. Class 1, 2, and 3 BRAF-mutated
metastatic colorectal cancer: a detailed clinical, pathologic, and molecular characterization. Clin Cancer Res. 2019;25(13):3954-3961.
11. Le DT, Uram JN, Wang H, et al. PD-1 blockade in tumours with
mismatch-repair deﬁciency. N Engl J Med. 2015;372(26):2509-2520.
12. André T, Shiu K-K, Kim TW, et al. Pembrolizumab in microsatelliteinstabilityehigh advanced colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2020;383(23):2207-2218.
13. Stjepanovic N, Moreira L, Carneiro F, et al. Hereditary gastrointestinal
cancers: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment
and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2019;30(10):1558-1571.
14. Sartore-Bianchi A, Trusolino L, Martino C, et al. Dual-targeted therapy
with trastuzumab and lapatinib in treatment-refractory, KRAS codon
12/13 wild-type, HER2-positive metastatic colorectal cancer

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

27

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

15.

16.

17.

18.

19.

20.

21.

22.

23.

24.

25.

26.

27.

28.

29.

30.

31.

32.

28

(HERACLES): a proof-of-concept, multicentre, open-label, phase 2
trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17(6):738-746.
Pietrantonio F, Di Nicolantonio F, Schrock AB, et al. ALK, ROS1, and
NTRK rearrangements in metastatic colorectal cancer. J Natl Cancer
Inst. 2017;109(12). https://doi.org/10.1093/jnci/djx089.
Marchiò C, Scaltriti M, Ladanyi M, et al. ESMO recommendations on
the standard methods to detect NTRK fusions in daily practice and
clinical research. Ann Oncol. 2019;30(9):1417-1427.
Hong DS, DuBois SG, Kummar S, et al. Larotrectinib in patients with
TRK fusion-positive solid tumours: a pooled analysis of three phase 1/
2 clinical trials. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(4):531-540.
Doebele RC, Drilon A, Paz-Ares L, et al. Entrectinib in patients with
advanced or metastatic NTRK fusion-positive solid tumours: integrated analysis of three phase 1-2 trials. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(2):
271-282.
Argilés G, Tabernero J, Labianca R, et al. Localised colon cancer: ESMO
Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up.
Ann Oncol. 2020;31(10):1291-1305.
Niekel MC, Bipat S, Stoker J. Diagnostic imaging of colorectal liver
metastases with CT, MR imaging, FDG PET, and/or FDG PET/CT: a
meta-analysis of prospective studies including patients who have
not previously undergone treatment. Radiology. 2010;257(3):674684.
Duffy MJ, Lamerz R, Haglund C, et al. Tumour markers in colorectal
cancer, gastric cancer and gastrointestinal stromal cancers: European
group on tumour markers 2014 guidelines update. Int J Cancer.
2014;134(11):2513-2522.
Arnold D, Lueza B, Douillard JY, et al. Prognostic and predictive value
of primary tumour side in patients with RAS wild-type metastatic
colorectal cancer treated with chemotherapy and EGFR directed antibodies in six randomised trials. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(8):1713-1729.
Dienstmann R, Vermeulen L, Guinney J, et al. Consensus molecular
subtypes and the evolution of precision medicine in colorectal cancer.
Nat Rev Cancer. 2017;17(2):79-92.
Xu H, Xia Z, Jia X, et al. Primary tumour resection is associated with
improved survival in stage IV colorectal cancer: an instrumental
variable analysis. Sci Rep. 2015;5:16516.
Yi C, Li J, Tang F, et al. Is primary tumour excision and speciﬁc metastases sites resection associated with improved survival in stage Ⅳ
colorectal cancer? Results from SEER database analysis. Am Surg.
2020;86(5):499-507.
Faron M, Pignon JP, Malka D, et al. Is primary tumour resection
associated with survival improvement in patients with colorectal
cancer and unresectable synchronous metastases? A pooled analysis
of individual data from four randomised trials. Eur J Cancer.
2015;51(2):166-176.
Kanemitsu Y, Shitara K, Mizusawa J, et al. Primary tumour resection
plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone for colorectal cancer
patients with asymptomatic, synchronous unresectable metastases
(JCOG1007; iPACS): a randomised clinical trial. J Clin Oncol.
2021;39(10):1098-1107.
Rahbari NN, Biondo S, Feißt M, et al. Randomised clinical trial on
resection of the primary tumour versus no resection prior to systemic
therapy in patients with colon cancer and synchronous unresectable
metastases. J Clin Oncol. 2022;40(17_suppl):LBA3507.
Prades J, Borras JM. Shifting sands: adapting the multidisciplinary
team model to technological and organizational innovations in cancer
care. Future Oncol. 2014;10(13):1995-1998.
Beets G, Sebag-Monteﬁore D, Andritsch E, et al. ECCO essential requirements for quality cancer care: colorectal cancer. A critical review.
Crit Rev Oncol Hematol. 2017;110:81-93.
Shah S, Arora S, Atkin G, et al. Decision-making in colorectal cancer
tumour board meetings: results of a prospective observational
assessment. Surg Endosc. 2014;28(10):2783-2788.
Osterlund P, Salminen T, Soveri LM, et al. Repeated centralized
multidisciplinary team assessment of resectability, clinical behavior,
and outcomes in 1086 Finnish metastatic colorectal cancer patients
(RAXO): a nationwide prospective intervention study. Lancet Reg
Health Eur. 2021;3:100049.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

33. Adam R, De Gramont A, Figueras J, et al. The oncosurgery approach
to managing liver metastases from colorectal cancer: a multidisciplinary international consensus. Oncologist. 2012;17(10):1225-1239.
34. Nordlinger B, Sorbye H, Glimelius B, et al. Perioperative chemotherapy with FOLFOX4 and surgery versus surgery alone for resectable liver metastases from colorectal cancer (EORTC Intergroup trial
40983): a randomised controlled trial. Lancet. 2008;371(9617):10071016.
35. Primrose J, Falk S, Finch-Jones M, et al. Systemic chemotherapy with
or without cetuximab in patients with resectable colorectal liver
metastasis: the New EPOC randomised controlled trial. Lancet Oncol.
2014;15(6):601-611.
36. Adam R, de Gramont A, Figueras J, et al. Managing synchronous liver
metastases from colorectal cancer: a multidisciplinary international
consensus. Cancer Treat Rev. 2015;41(9):729-741.
37. Cao C, Yan TD, Black D, et al. A systematic review and meta-analysis
of cytoreductive surgery with perioperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy for peritoneal carcinomatosis of colorectal origin. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2009;16(8):2152-2165.
38. Cotte E, Passot G, Mohamed F, et al. Management of peritoneal
carcinomatosis from colorectal cancer: current state of practice.
Cancer J. 2009;15(3):243-248.
39. Elias D, Lefevre JH, Chevalier J, et al. Complete cytoreductive surgery
plus intraperitoneal chemohyperthermia with oxaliplatin for peritoneal
carcinomatosis of colorectal origin. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(5):681-685.
40. Quenet F, Elias D, Roca L, et al. Cytoreductive surgery plus hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy versus cytoreductive surgery
alone for colorectal peritoneal metastases (PRODIGE 7): a multicentre, randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol.
2021;22(2):256-266.
41. Nordlinger B, Sorbye H, Glimelius B, et al. Perioperative FOLFOX4
chemotherapy and surgery versus surgery alone for resectable liver
metastases from colorectal cancer (EORTC 40983): long-term results
of a randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(12):
1208-1215.
42. Bridgewater JA, Pugh SA, Maishman T, et al. Systemic chemotherapy
with or without cetuximab in patients with resectable colorectal
liver metastasis (New EPOC): long-term results of a multicentre,
randomised, controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21(3):398411.
43. Stintzing S, Modest DP, Rossius L, et al. FOLFIRI plus cetuximab versus
FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab for metastatic colorectal cancer (FIRE-3): a
post-hoc analysis of tumour dynamics in the ﬁnal RAS wild-type
subgroup of this randomised open-label phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol.
2016;17(10):1426-1434.
44. Lenz H, Niedzwiecki D, Innocenti F, et al. Calgb/Swog 80405: phase III trial
of irinotecan/5-FU/leucovorin (FOLFIRI) or oxaliplatin/5-FU/leucovorin
(mFOLFOX6) with bevacizumab (BV) or cetuximab (CET) for patients (Pts)
with expanded Ras analyses untreated metastatic adenocarcinoma of
the colon or rectum (MCRC). Ann Oncol. 2014;25(4):v1.
45. Falcone A, Ricci S, Brunetti I, et al. Phase III trial of infusional ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan (FOLFOXIRI) compared
with infusional ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan (FOLFIRI) as
ﬁrst-line treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer: the Gruppo
Oncologico Nord Ovest. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(13):1670-1676.
46. Loupakis F, Cremolini C, Masi G, et al. Initial therapy with FOLFOXIRI
and bevacizumab for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2014;371(17):1609-1618.
47. Gruenberger T, Bridgewater J, Chau I, et al. Bevacizumab plus
mFOLFOX-6 or FOLFOXIRI in patients with initially unresectable liver
metastases from colorectal cancer: the OLIVIA multinational randomised phase II trial. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(4):702-708.
48. Ducreux M, Ychou M, Laplanche A, et al. Hepatic arterial oxaliplatin
infusion plus intravenous chemotherapy in colorectal cancer with
inoperable hepatic metastases: a trial of the gastrointestinal group of
the Fédération Nationale des Centres de Lutte Contre le Cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2005;23(22):4881-4887.
49. Lévi FA, Boige V, Hebbar M, et al. Conversion to resection of liver
metastases from colorectal cancer with hepatic artery infusion of

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

56.

57.

58.
59.

60.

61.

62.

63.

64.

65.

66.

67.

68.

69.

Annals of Oncology

combined chemotherapy and systemic cetuximab in multicenter trial
OPTILIV. Ann Oncol. 2016;27(2):267-274.
Jones RP, Vauthey JN, Adam R, et al. Effect of specialist decisionmaking on treatment strategies for colorectal liver metastases. Br J
Surg. 2012;99(9):1263-1269.
Modest DP, Denecke T, Pratschke J, et al. Surgical treatment options
following chemotherapy plus cetuximab or bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer-central evaluation of FIRE-3. Eur J Cancer.
2018;88:77-86.
Goéré D, Pignon JP, Gelli M, et al. Postoperative hepatic arterial
chemotherapy in high-risk patients as adjuvant treatment after
resection of colorectal liver metastases - a randomised phase II/III
trial - PACHA-01 (NCT02494973). BMC Cancer. 2018;18(1):787.
Wong SL, Mangu PB, Choti MA, et al. American Society of Clinical
Oncology 2009 clinical evidence review on radiofrequency ablation of
hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(3):
493-508.
de Baère T, Aupérin A, Deschamps F, et al. Radiofrequency ablation is
a valid treatment option for lung metastases: experience in 566 patients with 1037 metastases. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(5):987-991.
Shady W, Petre EN, Do KG, et al. Percutaneous microwave versus
radiofrequency ablation of colorectal liver metastases: ablation with
clear margins (A0) provides the best local tumour control. J Vasc
Interv Radiol. 2018;29(2):268-275.e1.
de Baere T, Tselikas L, Woodrum D, et al. Evaluating cryoablation of
metastatic lung tumours in patientsdsafety and efﬁcacy: the ECLIPSE
trialdinterim analysis at 1 year. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10(10):1468-1474.
Kobiela J, Spychalski P, Marvaso G, et al. Ablative stereotactic radiotherapy for oligometastatic colorectal cancer: systematic review. Crit
Rev Oncol Hematol. 2018;129:91-101.
Tree AC, Khoo VS, Eeles RA, et al. Stereotactic body radiotherapy for
oligometastases. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(1):e28-e37.
Khattak MA, Martin HL, Beeke C, et al. Survival differences in patients
with metastatic colorectal cancer and with single site metastatic
disease at initial presentation: results from South Australian Clinical
Registry for Advanced Colorectal Cancer. Clin Colorectal Cancer.
2012;11(4):247-254.
Price TJ, Townsend AR, Beeke C, et al. “Watchful waiting” for metastatic colorectal cancer, antediluvian or an option to be considered
again? Asia Pac J Clin Oncol. 2012;8(1):10-13.
Weiser MR, Jarnagin WR, Saltz LB. Colorectal cancer patients with
oligometastatic liver disease: what is the optimal approach? Oncology
(Williston Park). 2013;27(11):1074-1078.
Fonck M, Perez JT, Catena V, et al. Pulmonary thermal ablation enables long chemotherapy-free survival in metastatic colorectal cancer
patients. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2018;41(11):1727-1734.
Tanis E, Nordlinger B, Mauer M, et al. Local recurrence rates after
radiofrequency ablation or resection of colorectal liver metastases.
Analysis of the European Organisation for Research and Treatment of
Cancer #40004 and #40983. Eur J Cancer. 2014;50(5):912-919.
Shady W, Petre EN, Gonen M, et al. Percutaneous radiofrequency
ablation of colorectal cancer liver metastases: factors affecting outcomes–a 10-year experience at a single center. Radiology.
2016;278(2):601-611.
Ruers T, Van Coevorden F, Punt CJA, et al. Local treatment of unresectable colorectal liver metastases: results of a randomised phase II
trial. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2017;109(9):djx015.
Evrard S, Poston G, Kissmeyer-Nielsen P, et al. Combined ablation and
resection (CARe) as an effective parenchymal sparing treatment for
extensive colorectal liver metastases. PLoS One. 2014;9(12):e114404.
van Amerongen MJ, Jenniskens SFM, van den Boezem PB, et al.
Radiofrequency ablation compared to surgical resection for curative
treatment of patients with colorectal liver metastases e a metaanalysis. HPB (Oxford). 2017;19(9):749-756.
Shady W, Petre EN, Vakiani E, et al. Kras mutation is a marker of worse
oncologic outcomes after percutaneous radiofrequency ablation of
colorectal liver metastases. Oncotarget. 2017;8(39):66117-66127.
Elias D, De Baere T, Smayra T, et al. Percutaneous radiofrequency
thermoablation as an alternative to surgery for treatment of liver

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

70.

71.

72.

73.

74.

75.

76.

77.

78.

79.

80.

81.

82.

83.

84.

85.

86.

87.

88.

tumour recurrence after hepatectomy. Br J Surg. 2002;89(6):752756.
Sofocleous CT, Petre EN, Gonen M, et al. CT-guided radiofrequency
ablation as a salvage treatment of colorectal cancer hepatic metastases developing after hepatectomy. J Vasc Interv Radiol. 2011;22(6):
755-761.
Gu Y, Huang Z, Gu H, et al. Does the site of the primary affect outcomes when ablating colorectal liver metastases with radiofrequency
ablation? Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2018;41(6):912-919.
Gillams A, Khan Z, Osborn P, et al. Survival after radiofrequency
ablation in 122 patients with inoperable colorectal lung metastases.
Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2012;36(3):724-730.
Kurilova I, Gonzalez-Aguirre A, Beets-Tan RG, et al. Microwave ablation in the management of colorectal cancer pulmonary metastases.
Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2018;41(10):1530-1544.
Najaﬁ A, de Baere T, Purenne E, et al. Risk factors for local tumour
progression after RFA of pulmonary metastases: a matched casecontrol study. Eur Radiol. 2021;31(7):5361-5369.
Kashima M, Yamakado K, Takaki H, et al. Complications after 1000
lung radiofrequency ablation sessions in 420 patients: a single center’s experiences. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2011;197(4):W576-W580.
Schlijper RCJ, Grutters JPC, Houben R, et al. What to choose as radical
local treatment for lung metastases from colo-rectal cancer: surgery
or radiofrequency ablation? Cancer Treat Rev. 2014;40(1):60-67.
Ahmed KA, Caudell JJ, El-Haddad G, et al. Radiosensitivity differences
between liver metastases based on primary histology suggest implications for clinical outcomes after stereotactic body radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol Phys. 2016;95(5):1399-1404.
Binkley MS, Trakul N, Jacobs LR, et al. Colorectal histology is associated with an increased risk of local failure in lung metastases treated
with stereotactic ablative radiation therapy. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2015;92(5):1044-1052.
Oh D, Ahn YC, Seo JM, et al. Potentially curative stereotactic body
radiation therapy (SBRT) for single or oligometastasis to the lung.
Acta Oncol. 2012;51(5):596-602.
Fiorentini G, Aliberti C, Tilli M, et al. Intra-arterial infusion of
irinotecan-loaded drug-eluting beads (DEBIRI) versus intravenous
therapy (FOLFIRI) for hepatic metastases from colorectal cancer: ﬁnal
results of a phase III study. Anticancer Res. 2012;32(4):1387-1395.
Martin RCG, Scoggins CR, Schreeder M, et al. Randomised controlled
trial of irinotecan drug-eluting beads with simultaneous FOLFOX and
bevacizumab for patients with unresectable colorectal liver-limited
metastasis. Cancer. 2015;121(20):3649-3658.
Jones RP, Malik HZ, Fenwick SW, et al. PARAGON II e a single arm
multicentre phase II study of neoadjuvant therapy using irinotecan
bead in patients with resectable liver metastases from colorectal
cancer. Eur J Surg Oncol. 2016;42(12):1866-1872.
Akinwande O, Dendy M, Ludwig JM, et al. Hepatic intra-arterial injection of irinotecan drug eluting beads (DEBIRI) for patients with
unresectable colorectal liver metastases: a systematic review. Surg
Oncol. 2017;26(3):268-275.
Fiorentini G, Carandina R, Sarti D, et al. Polyethylene glycol microspheres
loaded with irinotecan for arterially directed embolic therapy of metastatic liver cancer. World J Gastrointest Oncol. 2017;9(9):379-384.
Prince JF, van den Bosch MAAJ, Nijsen JFW, et al. Efﬁcacy of radioembolisation with 166Ho-microspheres in salvage patients with liver
metastases: a phase 2 study. J Nucl Med. 2017;59(4):582-588.
Smits MLJ, Nijsen JFW, van den Bosch MAAJ, et al. Holmium-166
radioembolisation in patients with unresectable, chemorefractory
liver metastases (HEPAR trial): a phase 1, dose-escalation study.
Lancet Oncol. 2012;13(10):1025-1034.
Hendlisz A, Eynde MVd, Peeters M, et al. Phase III trial comparing
protracted intravenous ﬂuorouracil infusion alone or with yttrium-90
resin microspheres radioembolisation for liver-limited metastatic
colorectal cancer refractory to standard chemotherapy. J Clin Oncol.
2010;28(23):3687-3694.
Wasan HS, Gibbs P, Sharma NK, et al. First-line selective internal
radiotherapy plus chemotherapy versus chemotherapy alone in patients with liver metastases from colorectal cancer (FOXFIRE,

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

29

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

89.

90.

91.

92.

93.

94.

95.

96.
97.

98.

99.

100.

101.

102.

103.

104.

105.

30

SIRFLOX, and FOXFIRE-Global): a combined analysis of three multicentre, randomised, phase 3 trials. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(9):11591171.
van Hazel GA, Heinemann V, Sharma NK, et al. SIRFLOX: randomised
phase III trial comparing ﬁrst-line mFOLFOX6 (plus or minus bevacizumab) versus mFOLFOX6 (plus or minus bevacizumab) plus selective internal radiation therapy in patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2016;34(15):1723-1731.
Gibbs P, Heinemann V, Sharma NK, et al. Effect of primary tumour
side on survival outcomes in untreated patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer when selective internal radiation therapy is added
to chemotherapy: combined analysis of two randomised controlled
studies. Clin Colorectal Cancer. 2018;17(4):e617-e629.
Deschamps F, Elias D, Goere D, et al. Intra-arterial hepatic chemotherapy: a comparison of percutaneous versus surgical implantation
of port-catheters. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 2010;34(5):973-979.
Boige V, Malka D, Elias D, et al. Hepatic arterial infusion of oxaliplatin
and intravenous LV5FU2 in unresectable liver metastases from
colorectal cancer after systemic chemotherapy failure. Ann Surg
Oncol. 2007;15(1):219-226.
Allard MA, Sebagh M, Baillie G, et al. Comparison of complete
pathologic response and hepatic injuries between hepatic arterial
infusion and systemic administration of oxaliplatin in patients with
colorectal liver metastases. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014;22(6):1925-1932.
Van Cutsem E, Cervantes A, Adam R, et al. ESMO consensus guidelines for the management of patients with metastatic colorectal
cancer. Ann Oncol. 2016;27(8):1386-1422.
Papamichael D, Audisio RA, Glimelius B, et al. Treatment of colorectal
cancer in older patients: International Society of Geriatric Oncology
(SIOG) consensus recommendations 2013. Ann Oncol. 2015;26(3):
463-476.
Papamichael D, Aapro M. Geriatric factors and outcomes in metastatic colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer. 2017;74:96-97.
Van Cutsem E, Cervantes A, Nordlinger B, et al. Metastatic colorectal
cancer: ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment
and follow-up. Ann Oncol. 2014;25:iii1-iii9.
Schmoll HJ, Van Cutsem E, Stein A, et al. ESMO Consensus Guidelines
for management of patients with colon and rectal cancer. A
personalized approach to clinical decision making. Ann Oncol.
2012;23(10):2479-2516.
Cassidy J, Clarke S, Díaz-Rubio E, et al. Randomised phase III study of
capecitabine plus oxaliplatin compared with ﬂuorouracil/folinic acid
plus oxaliplatin as ﬁrst-line therapy for metastatic colorectal cancer.
J Clin Oncol. 2008;26(12):2006-2012.
Van Cutsem E, Hoff PM, Harper P, et al. Oral capecitabine vs intravenous 5-ﬂuorouracil and leucovorin: integrated efﬁcacy data and
novel analyses from two large, randomised, phase III trials. Br J
Cancer. 2004;90(6):1190-1197.
Osterlund P, Kinos S, Pfeiffer P, et al. Continuation of ﬂuoropyrimidine
treatment with S-1 after cardiotoxicity on capecitabine- or 5ﬂuorouracil-based therapy in patients with solid tumours: a multicentre retrospective observational cohort study. ESMO Open.
2022;7(3):100427.
de Gramont A, Figer A, Seymour M, et al. Leucovorin and ﬂuorouracil
with or without oxaliplatin as ﬁrst-line treatment in advanced colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2000;18(16):2938-2947.
Douillard JY, Cunningham D, Roth AD, et al. Irinotecan combined with
ﬂuorouracil compared with ﬂuorouracil alone as ﬁrst-line treatment
for metastatic colorectal cancer: a multicentre randomised trial.
Lancet. 2000;355(9209):1041-1047.
Fuchs CS, Marshall J, Mitchell E, et al. Randomised, controlled trial of
irinotecan plus infusional, bolus, or oral ﬂuoropyrimidines in ﬁrst-line
treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the BICC-C
study. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(30):4779-4786.
Schmiegel W, Reinacher-Schick A, Arnold D, et al. Capecitabine/irinotecan or capecitabine/oxaliplatin in combination with bevacizumab
is effective and safe as ﬁrst-line therapy for metastatic colorectal
cancer: a randomised phase II study of the AIO colorectal study
group. Ann Oncol. 2013;24(6):1580-1587.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

106. Seymour MT, Maughan TS, Ledermann JA, et al. Different strategies of
sequential and combination chemotherapy for patients with poor
prognosis advanced colorectal cancer (MRC FOCUS): a randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370(9582):143-152.
107. Koopman M, Antonini NF, Douma J, et al. Sequential versus combination chemotherapy with capecitabine, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in
advanced colorectal cancer (CAIRO): a phase III randomised
controlled trial. Lancet. 2007;370(9582):135-142.
108. Grothey A, Sargent D, Goldberg RM, et al. Survival of patients with
advanced colorectal cancer improves with the availability of
ﬂuorouracil-leucovorin, irinotecan, and oxaliplatin in the course of
treatment. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22(7):1209-1214.
109. Van Cutsem E, Peeters M, Siena S, et al. Open-label phase III trial of
panitumumab plus best supportive care compared with best supportive care alone in patients with chemotherapy-refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2007;25(13):1658-1664.
110. Jonker DJ, O’Callaghan CJ, Karapetis CS, et al. Cetuximab for the
treatment of colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2007;357(20):2040-2048.
111. Lacouture ME, Sibaud V, Gerber PA, et al. Prevention and management of dermatological toxicities related to anticancer agents: ESMO
Clinical Practice Guidelines. Ann Oncol. 2021;32(2):157-170.
112. Douillard JY, Oliner KS, Siena S, et al. Panitumumab-FOLFOX4 treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2013;369(11):1023-1034.
113. Bokemeyer C, Köhne CH, Ciardiello F, et al. FOLFOX4 plus cetuximab
treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal cancer. Eur J Cancer.
2015;51(10):1243-1252.
114. Van Cutsem E, Köhne C-H, Hitre E, et al. Cetuximab and chemotherapy as initial treatment for metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J
Med. 2009;360(14):1408-1417.
115. Van Cutsem E, Lenz H-J, Köhne C-H, et al. Fluorouracil, leucovorin, and
irinotecan plus cetuximab treatment and RAS mutations in colorectal
cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(7):692-700.
116. Douillard JY, Siena S, Cassidy J, et al. Final results from PRIME:
randomised phase III study of panitumumab with FOLFOX4 for ﬁrstline treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer. Ann Oncol.
2014;25(7):1346-1355.
117. Qin S, Li J, Wang L, et al. Efﬁcacy and tolerability of ﬁrst-line cetuximab plus leucovorin, ﬂuorouracil, and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX-4) versus
FOLFOX-4 in patients with RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer:
the open-label, randomised, phase III TAILOR trial. J Clin Oncol.
2018;36(30):3031-3039.
118. Maughan TS, Adams RA, Smith CG, et al. Addition of cetuximab to
oxaliplatin-based ﬁrst-line combination chemotherapy for treatment
of advanced colorectal cancer: results of the randomised phase 3
MRC COIN trial. Lancet. 2011;377(9783):2103-2114.
119. Guren TK, Thomsen M, Kure EH, et al. Cetuximab in treatment of
metastatic colorectal cancer: ﬁnal survival analyses and extended RAS
data from the NORDIC-VII study. Br J Cancer. 2017;116(10):12711278.
120. Pietrantonio F, Cremolini C, Aprile G, et al. Single-agent panitumumab
in frail elderly patients with advanced RAS and BRAF wild-type
colorectal cancer: challenging drug label to light up new hope.
Oncologist. 2015;20(11):1261-1265.
121. Tebbutt NC, Wilson K, Gebski VJ, et al. Capecitabine, bevacizumab,
and mitomycin in ﬁrst-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer:
results of the Australasian gastrointestinal trials group randomised
phase III MAX study. J Clin Oncol. 2010;28(19):3191-3198.
122. Cunningham D, Lang I, Marcuello E, et al. Bevacizumab plus capecitabine versus capecitabine alone in elderly patients with previously
untreated metastatic colorectal cancer (AVEX): an open-label, randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(11):1077-1085.
123. Hurwitz H, Fehrenbacher L, Novotny W, et al. Bevacizumab plus irinotecan, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin for metastatic colorectal cancer.
N Engl J Med. 2004;350(23):2335-2342.
124. Saltz LB, Clarke S, Díaz-Rubio E, et al. Bevacizumab in combination
with oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy as ﬁrst-line therapy in metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomized phase III study. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26(12):2013-2019.

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

125. Yamada Y, Denda T, Gamoh M, et al. S-1 and irinotecan plus bevacizumab versus mFOLFOX6 or CapeOX plus bevacizumab as ﬁrst-line
treatment in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (TRICOLORE):
a randomised, open-label, phase III, noninferiority trial. Ann Oncol.
2018;29(3):624-631.
126. Denda T, Takashima A, Gamoh M, et al. Combination therapy of
bevacizumab with either S-1 and irinotecan or mFOLFOX6/CapeOX as
ﬁrst-line treatment of metastatic colorectal cancer (TRICOLORE):
exploratory analysis of RAS status and primary tumour location in a
randomised, open-label, phase III, non-inferiority trial. Eur J Cancer.
2021;154:296-306.
127. Tejpar S, Stintzing S, Ciardiello F, et al. Prognostic and predictive
relevance of primary tumour location in patients with RAS wild-type
metastatic colorectal cancer: retrospective analyses of the CRYSTAL
and FIRE-3 trials. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3(2):194-201.
128. Venook AP, Niedzwiecki D, Innocenti F, et al. Impact of primary (1o)
tumour location on overall survival (OS) and progression-free survival
(PFS) in patients (pts) with metastatic colorectal cancer (mCRC):
analysis of CALGB/SWOG 80405 (Alliance). J Clin Oncol.
2016;34(15_suppl):3504.
129. Rivera F, Karthaus M, Hecht JR, et al. Final analysis of the randomised
PEAK trial: overall survival and tumour responses during ﬁrst-line
treatment with mFOLFOX6 plus either panitumumab or bevacizumab in patients with metastatic colorectal carcinoma. Int J
Colorectal Dis. 2017;32(8):1179-1190.
130. Yoshino T, Uetake H, Tsuchihara K, et al. PARADIGM study: a multicenter, randomised, phase III study of mFOLFOX6 plus panitumumab
or bevacizumab as ﬁrst-line treatment in patients with RAS (KRAS/
NRAS) wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2021;39(3_suppl):85.
131. Tol J, Koopman M, Cats A, et al. Chemotherapy, bevacizumab, and
cetuximab in metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2009;360(6):
563-572.
132. Souglakos J, Androulakis N, Syrigos K, et al. FOLFOXIRI (folinic acid, 5ﬂuorouracil, oxaliplatin and irinotecan) vs FOLFIRI (folinic acid, 5ﬂuorouracil and irinotecan) as ﬁrst-line treatment in metastatic
colorectal cancer (MCC): a multicentre randomised phase III trial from
the Hellenic Oncology Research Group (HORG). Br J Cancer.
2006;94(6):798-805.
133. Cremolini C, Loupakis F, Antoniotti C, et al. FOLFOXIRI plus bevacizumab versus FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab as ﬁrst-line treatment of
patients with metastatic colorectal cancer: updated overall survival
and molecular subgroup analyses of the open-label, phase 3 TRIBE
study. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(13):1306-1315.
134. Cremolini C, Antoniotti C, Rossini D, et al. Upfront FOLFOXIRI plus
bevacizumab and reintroduction after progression versus mFOLFOX6
plus bevacizumab followed by FOLFIRI plus bevacizumab in the
treatment of patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (TRIBE2): a
multicentre, open-label, phase 3, randomised, controlled trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2020;21(4):497-507.
135. Rossini D, Antoniotti C, Lonardi S, et al. Upfront modiﬁed ﬂuorouracil,
leucovorin, oxaliplatin, and irinotecan plus panitumumab versus
ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and oxaliplatin plus panitumumab for patients with RAS/BRAF wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer: the
phase III TRIPLETE study by GONO. J Clin Oncol. 2022:JCO2200839.
https://doi.org/10.1200/JCO.22.00839.
136. Modest DP, Martens UM, Riera-Knorrenschild J, et al. FOLFOXIRI plus
panitumumab as ﬁrst-line treatment of RAS wild-type metastatic
colorectal cancer: the randomised, open-label, phase II VOLFI study
(AIO KRK0109). J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(35):3401-3411.
137. Le DT, Durham JN, Smith KN, et al. Mismatch repair deﬁciency predicts response of solid tumours to PD-1 blockade. Science.
2017;357(6349):409-413.
138. Overman MJ, McDermott R, Leach JL, et al. Nivolumab in patients
with metastatic DNA mismatch repair-deﬁcient or microsatellite
instability-high colorectal cancer (CheckMate 142): an open-label,
multicentre, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18(9):1182-1191.
139. Diaz LA, Jr, Shiu KK, Kim TW, et al. Pembrolizumab versus chemotherapy for microsatellite instability-high or mismatch repair-deﬁcient

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

140.

141.

142.

143.

144.

145.

146.

147.

148.

149.

150.

151.

152.

153.

154.

155.

metastatic colorectal cancer (KEYNOTE-177): ﬁnal analysis of a
randomised, open-label, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol. 2022;23(5):659670.
Chibaudel B, Maindrault-Goebel F, Lledo G, et al. Can chemotherapy
be discontinued in unresectable metastatic colorectal cancer? The
GERCOR OPTIMOX2 study. J Clin Oncol. 2009;27(34):5727-5733.
Koeberle D, Betticher DC, von Moos R, et al. Bevacizumab continuation versus no continuation after ﬁrst-line chemotherapy plus bevacizumab in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomised
phase III non-inferiority trial (SAKK 41/06). Ann Oncol. 2015;26(4):
709-714.
Aparicio T, Ghiringhelli F, Boige V, et al. Bevacizumab maintenance
versus no maintenance during chemotherapy-free intervals in metastatic colorectal cancer: a randomised phase III trial (PRODIGE 9).
J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(7):674-681.
Simkens LHJ, van Tinteren H, May A, et al. Maintenance treatment
with capecitabine and bevacizumab in metastatic colorectal cancer
(CAIRO3): a phase 3 randomised controlled trial of the Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group. Lancet. 2015;385(9980):1843-1852.
Hegewisch-Becker S, Graeven U, Lerchenmüller CA, et al. Maintenance strategies after ﬁrst-line oxaliplatin plus ﬂuoropyrimidine plus
bevacizumab for patients with metastatic colorectal cancer (AIO
0207): a randomised, non-inferiority, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet
Oncol. 2015;16(13):1355-1369.
Pietrantonio F, Morano F, Corallo S, et al. Maintenance therapy
with panitumumab alone vs panitumumab plus ﬂuorouracilleucovorin in patients with RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal
cancer: a phase 2 randomised clinical trial. JAMA Oncol. 2019;5(9):
1268-1275.
Modest DP, Karthaus M, Fruehauf S, et al. Panitumumab plus ﬂuorouracil and folinic acid versus ﬂuorouracil and folinic acid alone as
maintenance therapy in RAS wild-type metastatic colorectal cancer:
the randomised PANAMA trial (AIO KRK 0212). J Clin Oncol.
2022;40(1):72-82.
Sobrero AF, Maurel J, Fehrenbacher L, et al. EPIC: phase III trial of
cetuximab plus irinotecan after ﬂuoropyrimidine and oxaliplatin failure in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol.
2008;26(14):2311-2319.
Peeters M, Oliner KS, Price TJ, et al. Analysis of KRAS/NRAS mutations
in a phase III study of panitumumab with FOLFIRI compared with
FOLFIRI alone as second-line treatment for metastatic colorectal
cancer. Clin Cancer Res. 2015;21(24):5469-5479.
Giantonio BJ, Catalano PJ, Meropol NJ, et al. Bevacizumab in combination with oxaliplatin, ﬂuorouracil, and leucovorin (FOLFOX4) for
previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer: results from the
Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group Study E3200. J Clin Oncol.
2007;25(12):1539-1544.
Bennouna J, Sastre J, Arnold D, et al. Continuation of bevacizumab
after ﬁrst progression in metastatic colorectal cancer (ML18147): a
randomised phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2013;14(1):29-37.
Van Cutsem E, Tabernero J, Lakomy R, et al. Addition of aﬂibercept to
ﬂuorouracil, leucovorin, and irinotecan improves survival in a phase III
randomised trial in patients with metastatic colorectal cancer previously treated with an oxaliplatin-based regimen. J Clin Oncol.
2012;30(28):3499-3506.
Tabernero J, Yoshino T, Cohn AL, et al. Ramucirumab versus placebo in
combination with second-line FOLFIRI in patients with metastatic
colorectal carcinoma that progressed during or after ﬁrst-line therapy
with bevacizumab, oxaliplatin, and a ﬂuoropyrimidine (RAISE): a
randomised, double-blind, multicentre, phase 3 study. Lancet Oncol.
2015;16(5):499-508.
Yervoy Summary of Product Characteristics. Bristol-Myers Squibb. Available at https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/product-informati
on/yervoy-epar-product-information_en.pdf. Accessed August 2, 2022.
Corcoran RB, Atreya CE, Falchook GS, et al. Combined BRAF and MEK
inhibition with dabrafenib and trametinib in BRAF V600-mutant
colorectal cancer. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33(34):4023-4031.
Hong DS, Morris VK, Fu S, et al. Phase 1B study of vemurafenib in
combination with irinotecan and cetuximab in patients with BRAF-

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

31

A. Cervantes et al.

Annals of Oncology

156.

157.

158.

159.

160.

32

mutated advanced cancers and metastatic colorectal cancer. J Clin
Oncol. 2014;32(15_suppl). 3516-3516.
Tabernero J, Grothey A, Van Cutsem E, et al. Encorafenib plus
cetuximab as a new standard of care for previously treated BRAF
V600E-mutant metastatic colorectal cancer: updated survival results
and subgroup analyses from the BEACON study. J Clin Oncol.
2021;39(4):273-284.
Cunningham D, Humblet Y, Siena S, et al. Cetuximab monotherapy
and cetuximab plus irinotecan in irinotecan-refractory metastatic
colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med. 2004;351(4):337-345.
Cremolini C, Rossini D, Dell’Aquila E, et al. Rechallenge for
patients with RAS and BRAF wild-type metastatic colorectal
cancer with acquired resistance to ﬁrst-line cetuximab and irinotecan: a phase 2 single-arm clinical trial. JAMA Oncol.
2019;5(3):343-350.
Martinelli E, Martini G, Famiglietti V, et al. Cetuximab rechallenge
plus avelumab in pretreated patients with RAS wild-type metastatic
colorectal cancer: the phase 2 single-arm clinical CAVE trial. JAMA
Oncol. 2021;7(10):1529-1535.
Grothey A, Cutsem EV, Sobrero A, et al. Regorafenib monotherapy for
previously treated metastatic colorectal cancer (CORRECT): an international, multicentre, randomised, placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial.
Lancet. 2013;381(9863):303-312.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2022.10.003

161. Li J, Qin S, Xu R, et al. Regorafenib plus best supportive care versus placebo plus best supportive care in Asian patients with previously treated
metastatic colorectal cancer (CONCUR): a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2015;16(6):619-629.
162. Mayer RJ, Van Cutsem E, Falcone A, et al. Randomised trial of TAS-102
for refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. N Engl J Med.
2015;372(20):1909-1919.
163. Xu J, Kim TW, Shen L, et al. Results of a randomised, double-blind,
placebo-controlled, phase III trial of triﬂuridine/tipiracil (TAS-102)
monotherapy in Asian patients with previously treated metastatic
colorectal cancer: the TERRA study. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36(4):350-358.
164. Mateo J, Chakravarty D, Dienstmann R, et al. A framework to rank
genomic alterations as targets for cancer precision medicine: the
ESMO Scale for Clinical Actionability of molecular Targets (ESCAT).
Ann Oncol. 2018;29(9):1895-1902.
165. Cherny NI, Dafni U, Bogaerts J, et al. ESMO-magnitude of clinical
beneﬁt scale version 1.1. Ann Oncol. 2017;28(10):2340-2366.
166. Dykewicz CA. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic
infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients. Clin
Infect Dis. 2001;33(2):139-144.
167. Gross PA, Barrett TL, Dellinger EP, et al. Purpose of quality standards
for infectious diseases. Infectious Diseases Society of America. Clin
Infect Dis. 1994;18(3):421.

Volume 34

-

Issue 1

-

2023

