SPECIAL ARTICLE

Multiple myeloma: EHA-ESMO Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis,
treatment and follow-upy
M. A. Dimopoulos1, P. Moreau2, E. Terpos1, M. V. Mateos3, S. Zweegman4, G. Cook5, M. Delforge6, R. Hájek7,
F. Schjesvold8,9, M. Cavo10, H. Goldschmidt11, T. Facon12, H. Einsele13, M. Boccadoro14, J. San-Miguel15, P. Sonneveld16 &
U. Mey17, on behalf of the EHA Guidelines Committee* and ESMO Guidelines Committee*
1

Department of Clinical Therapeutics, School of Medicine, National and Kapodistrian University of Athens, Athens, Greece; 2Department of Hematology, University
Hospital Hôtel-Dieu, Nantes, France; 3University Hospital of Salamanca, IBSAL, Cancer Research Center, Salamanca, Spain; 4Department of Hematology, Amsterdam
UMC, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Cancer Center Amsterdam, Amsterdam, Netherlands; 5Leeds Cancer Centre and University of Leeds, Leeds, UK; 6Department of
Hematology, University Hospital Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; 7Faculty of Medicine, University Hospital Ostrava, Ostrava, Czech Republic; 8Oslo Myeloma Center, Oslo
University Hospital, Oslo; 9KG Jebsen Center for B Cell Malignancies, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway; 10Seràgnoli Institute of Hematology, Bologna University School
of Medicine, Bologna, Italy; 11University Hospital Heidelberg, Internal Medicine V and National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany; 12Hôpital
Claude Huriez, Lille University Hospital, Lille, France; 13Department of Internal Medicine II, University Hospital Wurzburg, Wurzburg, Germany; 14Division of
Hematology, University of Torino, AOU Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Torino, Italy; 15Clinica Universidad de Navarra, CIMA, IDISNA, CIBERONC, Pamplona,
Spain; 16Erasmus Medical Center Cancer Institute, Rotterdam, Netherlands; 17Department of Oncology and Hematology, Kantonsspital Graubünden, Chur, Switzerland

Available online 3 February 2021

Key words: multiple myeloma, clinical practice guidelines, diagnosis, treatment, follow-up, prognosis
INCIDENCE AND EPIDEMIOLOGY

Response criteria to anti-myeloma therapy

Multiple myeloma (MM) is a plasma cell neoplasm that accounts for 1%-1.8% of all cancers and is the second most
common haematological malignancy with an estimated incidence in Europe of 4.5-6.0/100 000/year. Despite the signiﬁcant improvement in patients’ survival over the past 20 years,
only 10%-15% of patients achieve or exceed expected survival
compared with the matched general population.1

One of the most signiﬁcant improvements in the
response criteria is the introduction of minimal residual
disease (MRD) both in the bone marrow (BM) [using
either next-generation sequencing or next-generation ﬂow
cytometry (NGF)] and outside the BM [using positron
emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT);
imaging MRD].3 MRD negativity in the BM in patients
who have achieved conventional complete response (CR)
consistently correlates with prolonged progression-free
survival (PFS) and overall survival (OS) in both newly
diagnosed MM (NDMM) and relapsed/refractory MM
(RRMM) patients.4,5
MRD negativity in the BM, deﬁned as the absence of
tumour plasma cells within 1 000 000 BM cells (<106)
shows the best results for the prediction of both PFS and OS
compared with higher cut-off values (i.e. 105).4 Outside
the BM, PET-CT is able to recognise hypermetabolic areas in
approximately 15%-20% of patients with MRD negativity in
the BM and is considered the best method for imaging MRD
to date.6
MRD has been found to be a surrogate endpoint for PFS
in patients receiving ﬁrst-line treatment.7 Therefore, MRD
may be used as an endpoint to accelerate drug development. The use of MRD to drive treatment decisions is under
investigation, e.g. whether maintenance/continuous therapy in MRD-negative patients can be stopped or whether
treatment needs to be changed in MRD-positive patients,
especially in high-risk MM. The results of several phase III
trials in the ﬁeld will clarify the role of MRD in making
decisions about therapy in MM.

DIAGNOSIS AND STAGING
In 2017, ESMO published clinical practice guidelines for the
diagnosis, staging and deﬁnitions of progressive disease,
relapse and refractoriness to therapy, which have not
changed and are summarised in Supplementary Tables S1-S3,
available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014.2
The recommendations for the tests that are required for
the diagnosis, determination of prognosis and follow-up of
MM are described in Table 1.
*Correspondence to: EHA Executive Ofﬁce/EHA Guidelines Committee Koninginnegracht 12b, 2514 AA The Hague, Netherlands
E-mail: guidelines@ehaweb.org (EHA Guidelines Committee).
*ESMO Guidelines Committee, ESMO Head Ofﬁce, Via Ginevra 4, 6900
Lugano, Switzerland
E-mail: clinicalguidelines@esmo.org (ESMO Guidelines Committee).
y
These Guidelines were developed by the European Hematology Association
(EHA) and European Society for Medical Oncology (ESMO). The two societies
nominated authors to write the guidelines as well as reviewers to comment on
them. These guidelines were approved by the EHA Board and the ESMO
Guidelines Committee in November 2020.
0923-7534/© 2021 The Author(s). published by Elsevier Ltd on behalf of
European Society for Medical Oncology and published by Wolters Kluwer
Health Inc. on behalf of European Hematology Association. All rights reserved.

Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

309

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Annals of Oncology
Table 1. Recommendations on examinations at diagnosis, response assessment, during follow-up and at relapse of MM

Blood

Urine

Bone marrow

Imaging

Tool

Diagnosis

At response

At follow-up

At relapse

Blood count and
blood smear
Serum electrophoresis
and IF
Serum-free light chain

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory (IF for
CR patients)
Obligatory

Obligatory

Serum immunoglobulin
levels
Renal and liver function
tests
Calcium
Lactate dehydrogenase
Albumin, b2m
Flow cytometry
Urine sample from 24 h
urine collection to check
for proteinuria and
light-chain proteinuria
Urine electrophoresis
and IF electrophoresis
BM cytology and biopsy
to conﬁrm plasmacytosis
and monoclonality
NGF or NGS to detect
clonal plasma cells

Obligatory

Obligatory (IF for
CR conﬁrmation)
Obligatory to
conﬁrm sCR
Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory
Obligatory
Obligatory
Optional
Obligatory

Obligatory
Obligatory
Not required
Not required
Obligatory

Obligatory
Obligatory
Optional
Not required
Obligatory

Obligatory
Obligatory
Obligatory
Optional
Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory (IF for
CR conﬁrmation)
Obligatory to conﬁrm
CR or for non-secretory
MM
Obligatory to conﬁrm
MRD negativity in
CR or sCR patients

Obligatory (IF for
CR patients)
Not required

Obligatory

Cytogenetics: karyotype
and FISH for detection
of del17p, t(4;14),
t(14;16), ampl
1q/ gain 1q, t(11;14)
Advanced techniques:
GEP, NGS
WBLD-CT

Obligatory

Not required

For clinical trials
use only
Obligatory

For clinical trials
use only
Not required

PET-CT

Optional (it may be
carried out instead
of WBLD-CT if available)

Obligatory to conﬁrm
imaging MRD

Whole-body MRI

Obligatory in
WBLD-CT-negative
cases and if PET-CT is
not carried out

Not required

Obligatory

Obligatory

Obligatory

Every 12 months in
CR and/or
MRD-negative
patientsa
Not required

For clinical trials
use only
When symptomatic
(or CT of the
symptomatic area)
Every 12 months in
bone marrow
MRD-negative
patientsb
When symptomatic

Obligatory

Optional (obligatory
for non-secretory
disease)
Optional

Obligatory for
del17p, ampl 1q/
gain 1q and t(11;14)

For clinical trials
use only
Obligatory

Optional

Optional

ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; b2m, beta-2 microglobulin; BM, bone marrow; CR, complete response; CT, computed tomography; FISH, ﬂuorescent in
situ hybridisation; GEP, gene expression proﬁling; IF, immunoﬁxation; IMWG, International Myeloma Working Group; MM, multiple myeloma; MRD, minimal residual disease; MRI,
magnetic resonance imaging; NGF, next-generation ﬂow cytometry; NGS, next-generation sequencing; PET, positron emission tomography; PFS, progression-free survival; sCR,
stringent complete response; WBLD-CT, whole-body low-dose computed tomography.
a
Sustained MRD negativity is supported by IMWG guidelines,3 although it is not fully reimbursed in several countries. In a recent ‘Real-World’ study, MRD assessments were
carried out in 139 patients before starting lenalidomide maintenance after ASCT and/or at the achievement of CR, while additional assessments were subsequently carried
out on an annual basis until sustained MRD negativity was conﬁrmed. In total, 34.3% of patients who were MRD-positive after induction treatment achieved MRD-negative
status during maintenance and ultimately had improved PFS. Sequential MRD assessments identiﬁed patients with progressively decreasing MRD levels who also had better
PFS outcomes, compared with patients not showing a decreasing pattern of MRD.90
b
Recommended based on panel consensus in order to conﬁrm extramedullary MRD negativity in patients who are MRD-negative in the bone marrow.
Adapted with permission from Caers et al.85

FRONT-LINE THERAPY
Smouldering MM
Patients with standard- or intermediate-risk smouldering MM
(SMM; see Supplementary Table S4, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014) do not need immediate
therapy. Myeloma treatment should be initiated according to
the International Myeloma Working Group (IMWG) recommendations.8 Regarding high-risk SMM, which is recently
deﬁned by the ‘20-20-20’ rule (Supplementary Table S4,
310

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

available at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014),9
two randomised, phase III studies have shown that lenalidomide plays a signiﬁcant role in prolonging PFS. In the ﬁrst
study, 119 patients with high-risk SMM (before the introduction of the new criteria for the deﬁnition of myeloma)8
were randomly assigned either to receive treatment with
the combination of lenalidomide plus dexamethasone (Rd)
for 9 cycles followed by lenalidomide maintenance or to
observation. At a median follow-up of 75 months, Rd
improved both PFS [median PFS (mPFS) not reached versus
Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Annals of Oncology

23 months; P < 0.0001] and OS compared with observation
[hazard ratio (HR) 0.43; P ¼ 0.024].10,11 However, this study
was conducted several years ago and enrolled a number of
patients who are considered as having MM according to the
revised deﬁnition. In the second study,12 182 patients with
intermediate- or high-risk SMM were randomly assigned
either to receive lenalidomide monotherapy or to observation. At a median follow-up of 35 months, PFS was longer
with lenalidomide (HR 0.28; P ¼ 0.002); this result was driven
mainly by the high-risk SMM group.12 This study has not
reported OS advantage for the lenalidomide arm to date.
Several phase II studies using daratumumab (Dara) monotherapy,13 isatuximab (Isa) monotherapy or other Rd-based
regimens [with elotuzumab (EloRd), or with ixazomib] have
shown encouraging results.
All the above data suggest that high-risk SMM patients
should be encouraged to participate in randomised phase III
trials to reveal the best treatment that offers OS advantage.
To date, no treatment has been approved for SMM.
Newly diagnosed patients who are eligible for high-dose
therapy and autologous transplantation
For ﬁt NDMM patients, aged <70 years, without comorbidities, induction followed by high-dose therapy (HDT) with
autologous stem cell transplantation (ASCT) and lenalidomide maintenance is the recommended treatment. Two
recent phase III trials comparing the use or not of upfront
ASCT, after triplet novel agent-based induction, showed that
PFS was improved in the upfront ASCT arm.14-16 The ﬁrst
study was conducted by the French Myeloma Study Group
and included 700 patients who were randomised to receive
induction therapy with 3 cycles of bortezomib, lenalidomide
and dexamethasone (VRd) and then consolidation therapy
with either 5 additional cycles of VRd or high-dose
melphalan (HDM) plus ASCT followed by 2 additional cycles of VRd. Patients in both groups received maintenance
therapy with lenalidomide for 1 year. After a median followup of 44 months in the VRd-alone group and 43 months in
the ASCT group, the mPFS was longer in the ASCT group (50
versus 36 months; P < 0.001). This beneﬁt was observed
across all patient subgroups, including advanced Revised
International Staging System (R-ISS) and high-risk cytogenetics. OS at 4 years was not different between the ASCT
and the non-ASCT groups.15
The second study was conducted by the European
Myeloma Network (EMN)dEMN02/HO95 trialdand
included 1503 patients who received an induction therapy
with 3-4 cycles of bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and
dexamethasone (VCD) followed by the ﬁrst randomisation
between bortezomib, melphalan and prednisone (VMP)
versus ASCT. A second randomisation to consolidation therapy (2 cycles of VRd) versus no consolidation was carried out
after intensiﬁcation therapy, to be followed by lenalidomide
maintenance until progression or toxicity in both arms. With
a median follow-up from the ﬁrst randomisation of 60.3
months, the mPFS was improved with ASCT compared with
VMP (56.7 versus 41.9 months; P ¼ 0.0001).16
Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

Induction regimen. A three-drug combination, including at
least bortezomib and dexamethasone, has been the standard of care.2,17 Bortezomib, thalidomide, dexamethasone
(VTD) induction showed better response rates over VCD at
the expense of a higher rate of peripheral neuropathy.18
VCD and bortezomib, doxorubicin and dexamethasone
(PAd) were equally effective in terms of response but VCD
was less toxic.19 In single-arm studies, VRd produced high
very good partial response (VGPR), CR and MRD negativity
rates, as well as prolonged PFS.4,15,20-22 However, there is
no direct comparison between VTD with VRd induction
before ASCT. There is only an integrated analysis of three
randomised trials, presented in abstract form, which
showed that VRd produces higher VGPR and MRD negativity rates compared with VTD.23
The introduction of monoclonal antibodies (mAbs), and
especially of Dara, in the front-line setting has changed the
treatment landscape in MM. In the phase III CASSIOPEIA
trial, 4 cycles of induction with VTD (n ¼ 542) were
compared with 4 cycles of VTD plus Dara (DaraVTD) (n ¼
543); patients then received a single ASCT followed by
consolidation and maintenance.24 PFS at 18 months showed
the superiority of DaraVTD over VTD (93% versus 85%, P <
0.0001).25 The combination of Dara with VRd (DaraVRd) had
better results. In the randomised phase II GRIFFIN study,
207 patients were randomly assigned to receive VRd  Dara
induction (4 cycles), ASCT, VRd  Dara consolidation
(2 cycles) and lenalidomide  Dara maintenance (26 cycles).
The 24-month PFS rates were 95.8% for DaraVRd and 89.8%
for VRd.21
The substitution of bortezomib with the secondgeneration proteasome inhibitor (PI) carﬁlzomib (K) resulted in high sustained MRD negativity rate in carﬁlzomib,
lenalidomide and dexamethasone (KRd) compared with
VRd, especially in patients with advanced R-ISS.26 There is
no direct comparison between VRd and KRd in NDMM
patients who are eligible for ASCT; however, in the
ENDURANCE trial (see Elderly patients’ section), which
included <30% of patients who received an ASCT, there was
no PFS difference between the two regimens.
Based on the above data, VRd is likely to offer the best
risk-beneﬁt proﬁle to date among triplet combinations [II,
B]. The four-drug combination DaraVTD is more efﬁcacious
than VTD [I, A] but comparisons are lacking versus DaraVRd
or VRd [these regimens have not been approved by the
European Medicines Agency (EMA)]. The EMA approval of
DaraVTD makes it a new standard of care for induction
before ASCT. Novel studies that are ongoing compare
DaraVRd versus VRd, DaraVCD versus VTD, or combinations
with novel mAbs such as IsaVRd, IsaKRd or EloVRd will
reveal the best induction regimen in the future.
Conditioning regimen before ASCT. HDM (200 mg/m2) remains the standard conditioning regimen before ASCT for
NDMM patients. The addition of busulfan to melphalan has
not shown OS beneﬁt over HDM.27,28 The addition of
bortezomib to HDM did not improve the efﬁcacy of the
conditioning regimen and had higher toxicity.29
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

311

Annals of Oncology
Consolidation therapy. The EMN02/HO95 study showed
that at a median follow-up of 42 months, consolidation
therapy with 2 cycles of VRd improved mPFS compared with
no consolidation (58.9 versus 45.5 months; P ¼ 0.014).16 It
must be noted that induction treatment in this study
included 4 cycles of VCD and not VRd or DaraVTD.
The use of a second planned ASCT as consolidation has
also been tested in clinical trials. In the EMN02/HO95 study,
in centres with a policy of double ASCT, patients were
assigned to receive VMP, single ASCT (ASCT-1) or two
planned ASCTs (administered 2-3 months apart; ASCT-2) to
prospectively compare ASCT-1 with ASCT-2. Patients who
received ASCT-2 had a prolonged PFS compared with those
who received ASCT-1: the 3-year PFS probability was 53.5%
for ASCT-2 versus 44.9% for ASCT-1 group (P ¼ 0.036),
which represented a 26% reduced risk of progression or
death in the ASCT-2 group. Importantly, ASCT-2 signiﬁcantly
improved the outcome of patients with high-risk cytogenetics (mPFS: 46 and 26.7 months for ASCT-2 and ASCT-1,
respectively; HR 0.59; P ¼ 0.062).14 In the same study, OS
from the ﬁrst randomisation was signiﬁcantly prolonged
with ASCT-2 compared with ASCT-1 (3-year rate: 89% versus
82%; HR 0.52; P ¼ 0.011); this beneﬁt was also reported in
patients with R-ISS II þ III (HR 0.48; P ¼ 0.013) and with
high-risk cytogenetics (HR 0.52; P ¼ 0.042).14
The phase III StaMINA study randomised 758 patients who
received induction therapy for up to 12 cycles, followed by
one ASCT versus tandem ASCT versus ASCT-1 followed by 4
subsequent cycles of VRd; all treatment groups received
lenalidomide maintenance until disease progression.30
The 6-year PFS in high-risk patients was 43.6% and 26%
for tandem ASCT and ASCT-1, respectively (P ¼ 0.03).31
Finally, a study which compared tandem ASCTs with
ASCT-1 followed by allogeneic SCT (allo-SCT) has recently
reported the 10-year median follow-up results. In both
standard-risk (n ¼ 625) and high-risk patients (n ¼ 85),
there was no PFS or OS difference.32
Maintenance therapy. Treatment with lenalidomide maintenance after ASCT offers PFS and OS beneﬁts over placebo
as reported in two large randomised trials.33,34 A metaanalysis including more than 1200 patients, with a median
follow-up of 79.5 months, showed that lenalidomide
maintenance offers more than 2 years of PFS beneﬁt (52.8
versus 23.5 months) and 2.5 years of OS beneﬁt over placebo. In this study, there was no beneﬁt in patients with
ISS-III disease or high-risk cytogenetics.35 However, the
Medical Research Council (MRC) myeloma-XI trial, in which
1137 patients were assigned to lenalidomide maintenance
and 834 patients to observation, showed that, in high-risk
patients, the 3-year OS was 75% in the lenalidomide
group compared with 64% in the observation group, and in
ultra-high-risk patients it was 63% versus 43.5%, respectively.36 These results should be taken with caution as the
study was not powered to show differences in the two subpopulations and all patients who entered the maintenance
phase were immunomodulatory drug (IMiD)-exposed and
-sensitive. Furthermore the deﬁnition of high-risk patients
312

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

was different in the meta-analysis and in the MRC-XI trial; in
the meta-analysis, high-risk cytogenetics included only
t(4;14) and del17p patients while in the MRC-XI trial patients were classiﬁed into three cytogenetic risk groups:
standard risk (no adverse cytogenetic abnormalities), high
risk (one adverse cytogenetic abnormality) or ultra-high risk
(two or more adverse cytogenetic abnormalities) [adverse
cytogenetic abnormalities were deﬁned as gain(1q), t(4;14),
t(14;16), t(14;20), or del(17p)].35,36 The EMA has approved
lenalidomide for maintenance therapy post-ASCT for all MM
patients until progression.
Bortezomib maintenance showed PFS beneﬁt compared
with thalidomide maintenance in a randomised study, but
the induction treatment was not the same between the two
treatment groups [PAd versus vincristine, doxorubicin and
dexamethasone (VAD), respectively].37 A recent doubleblind, placebo-controlled, phase III trial (TOURMALINEMM3) compared the oral PI ixazomib with placebo in 656
patients who received induction therapy plus HDM þ ASCT.
There was a 28% reduction in the risk of progression or
death with ixazomib (mPFS: 26.5 versus 21.3 months,
respectively; P ¼ 0.0023). In the high-risk population,
ixazomib also offered similar PFS advantage over placebo
(HR 0.62, 95% CI 0.38-1.02).38 Bortezomib and ixazomib
have not yet been approved by the EMA for maintenance
after ASCT.
Elderly patients or patients with NDMM who are ‘not’
eligible to receive HDT and autologous transplantation
Before 2019, VMP and Rd were the standards of care for
NDMM patients who were not eligible for an ASCT in
Europe.39,40 A phase III trial comparing VRd with Rd in
525 NDMM patients (43% were younger than 65 years of
age) was recently updated and showed the superiority of
VRd regarding PFS (mPFS: 41 versus 29 months; P ¼
0.003) and OS [median OS (mOS) not reached versus 69
months; P ¼ 0.0114].41 Based on these results, the EMA
approved VRd in April 2019 for use in NDMM patients
who are not eligible for ASCT. The substitution of bortezomib with K in the Rd combination seems not to offer
better results. The ENDURANCE trial, which compared
KRd versus VRd in NDMM patients without an immediate
intent for ASCT, failed to show superiority of KRd
regarding PFS in the study population (n ¼ 1087), which
included a low number of patients with high-risk
cytogenetics.42
The addition of Dara to VMP and Rd has created two new
standards of care. DaraVMP and DaraRd were approved by
the EMA in October 2019, based on the results of two large
phase III studies. In the ALCYONE study, 706 patients with
NDMM who were ineligible for ASCT were randomised to
receive 9 cycles of VMP either alone or with Dara
(DaraVMP); then Dara was given until disease progression.43 At a median follow-up of 40 months, the mPFS was
36.4 versus 19.3 months for the DaraVMP and VMP arms,
respectively, while the 36-month rate of OS was 78% and
68% for the two groups (HR 0.60; P ¼ 0.0003).44 In the
Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Annals of Oncology

Eligibility for ASCT

Yes

No

Induction

First option:
DaraRd [I, A]
DaraVMP [I, A]
VRd [I, A]

First option:
VRd [II, B]
DaraVTD [I, A]
If first option is not available:
VTD [I, A]
VCD [II, B]

If first option is not available:
VMP [I, A]
Rd [I, A]

200 mg/m2 melphalan [I, A]
followed by ASCT [I, A]

Lenalidomide maintenance [I, A]

Figure 1. Recommendations for MM front-line therapy.
ASCT, autologous stem cell transplantation; DaraRd, daratumumab/lenalidomide/dexamethasone; DaraVMP, daratumumab/bortezomib/melphalan/prednisone;
DaraVTD, daratumumab/bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone; MM, multiple myeloma; Rd, lenalidomide/dexamethasone; VCD, bortezomib/cyclophosphamide/
dexamethasone; VMP, bortezomib/melphalan/prednisone; VRd, bortezomib/lenalidomide/dexamethasone; VTD, bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone.

MAIA study, 737 NDMM patients who were ineligible for
ASCT were randomised to receive either DaraRd or Rd until
disease progression. At a median follow-up of 28 months,
the estimated PFS at 30 months was 70.6% in the DaraRd
group and 55.6% in the Rd group (HR 0.56; P < 0.001).45
Other approved regimens in this setting include bendamustine plus prednisone46 and melphalan, prednisone and
lenalidomide (MPR),47 but they are not routinely used and
cannot be considered as standards of care.
It is important to realise that one-third of patients are
older than 75 years at diagnosis and at least 30% are frail.
Please refer to Management of frail elderly patients in the
Supplementary Material, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, for consensus panel recommendations for the management of these patients.
Although maintenance is not standard for patients who
are not eligible for ASCT (almost all approved regimens are
Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

used continuously until progression or unacceptable
toxicity), ixazomib maintenance was tested in a phase III
study which included 706 patients who received 6-12
months of standard induction before being randomised to
receive either ixazomib or placebo. Ixazomib maintenance
offered a PFS beneﬁt over placebo (17.4 versus 9.4 months,
HR 0.65, P ¼ 0.00003).48 Figure 1 depicts the ﬁrst-line
options for the treatment of NDMM patients.

Recommendations
 ‘Watch-and-wait’ remains the recommended approach
for SMM [II, B]. High-risk patients are encouraged to
participate in randomised phase III studies that are powered for OS advantage of the experimental treatment
modality.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

313

Annals of Oncology
 For patients <70 years without comorbidities, induction
therapy followed by HDM and ASCT is the recommended
treatment [I, A].
 Regarding induction therapy pre-ASCT, VRd is likely to
offer the best risk-beneﬁt proﬁle to date among triplets
based on bortezomib [II, B]; however, VRd lacks direct
comparisons with VTD or DaraVTD and is not licensed
by the EMA. The four-drug combination DaraVTD is
more efﬁcacious than VTD [I, A] and is the new standard
of care. If this is not available, VTD [I, A] or VCD [II, B]
may be used. DaraVRd and IsaVRd are under clinical
investigation and may be standards of care in the near
future. Induction with 4-6 cycles is the recommended
approach.
 HDM (200 mg/m2) is the standard conditioning regimen
before ASCT [I, A].
 Consolidation therapy post-ASCT has not been established to date as standard therapy; 2 cycles of VRd
consolidation has to be considered in patients who
receive VCD induction [II, B], while a tandem ASCT is recommended for patients with genetically deﬁned
high-risk disease [II, B] or in all patients who received
VCD induction [II, B]. Allo-SCT following ASCT does not
offer OS beneﬁt even in high-risk disease compared
with tandem ASCT.
 Maintenance with lenalidomide is considered the standard of care for all MM patients post-ASCT [I, A]; bortezomib may be considered for patients with high-risk
disease [II, B]. Ixazomib maintenance offers PFS beneﬁt
over placebo [I, A], but has not been approved by the
EMA or the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA).
 For patients who are not eligible for ASCT, there are
three new standards of care: VRd, DaraVMP and
DaraRd [I, A]. When DaraRd and DaraVMP are not available, VRd is the preferred option in ﬁt patients; Rd and
VMP may be considered for patients who cannot receive
the previous regimens [I, A].

TREATMENT OF RELAPSED/REFRACTORY PATIENTS
Patients who have received one prior line of therapy
Salvage ASCT may be an option for patients who have
received front-line induction with bortezomib-based triplet
combination followed by an ASCT. Two prospective studies
of salvage ASCT have been published so far. The ﬁrst
included a bortezomib-based re-induction and a randomisation between salvage ASCT or cyclophosphamide, which
is suboptimal for relapsed patients. Salvage ASCT signiﬁcantly extended mPFS (19 versus 11 months; P < 0.001) and
OS (67 versus 52 months; P ¼ 0.0169).49 The second
included patients with ﬁrst to third relapse who were
randomised to a transplant arm (n ¼ 139) consisting of 3 Rd
re-induction cycles, ASCT and lenalidomide maintenance
(10 mg/day) or to a control arm (n ¼ 138) of continuous Rd.
Although there was no difference regarding PFS and OS
between the two arms, almost 30% of the patients in the
transplant arm did not receive the assigned ASCT mainly
314

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

due to early disease progression. Multivariate landmark
analyses from the time of ASCT showed superior PFS and OS
(P ¼ 0.0087 and P ¼ 0.0057 respectively) in patients who
received ASCT.50 The American and European Associations
for Bone and Marrow Transplantation have reported that
HDT and ASCT should be considered appropriate treatment
of any patient relapsing after primary therapy that includes
an ASCT with initial remission duration of >18 months.51
However, this recommendation was made before the
broad use of lenalidomide as maintenance therapy postASCT. Although there is no evidence for the role of
salvage ASCT in patients who received lenalidomide maintenance, the panel suggests that second-line ASCT is a
logical approach for patients who relapse after primary
therapy that includes an ASCT followed by lenalidomide
maintenance and had an initial remission duration of 36
months. The use of re-induction is a matter of debate as
there is no prospective study on this issue. Retrospective
studies suggest that the use of re-induction does not offer
survival beneﬁt in salvage ASCT.52
In patients in whom a salvage ASCT is not considered, the
second-line therapy should include an Rd-based regimen,
i.e. KRd, DaraRd, ixazomib/lenalidomide/dexamethasone
(IRd) or EloRd for patients who received a bortezomibbased therapy upfront without lenalidomide or Dara (i.e.
VCD, VTD, VMP); all these combinations were found to be
superior to Rd, in terms of PFS, in pivotal phase III
studies.53-56 Based on both HR and absolute values of mPFS,
DaraRd provides the longest PFS for patients with RRMM
who have received 1-3 prior lines of therapy and have a
standard-risk cytogenetic proﬁle. KRd and EloRd have also
shown OS beneﬁt over Rd: mOS 48.3 versus 40.4 months
for KRd versus Rd (HR 0.79; P ¼ 0.0045),57 and 48.3 versus
39.6 months for EloRd versus Rd,58 respectively. DaraRd is
likely to have OS beneﬁt over Rd, but mature data have not
been presented, while IRd has no OS beneﬁt over Rd. For
relapsed patients with high-risk cytogenetics, although
different cut-off values are used for the deﬁnition of del17p
positivity, all above triplets have shown better results
compared with Rd; however, the combination of a PI with
Rd, i.e. KRd or IRd, along with DaraRd seem to offer the best
beneﬁt to date.
Elderly patients who received Rd upfront without Dara59
or patients who received lenalidomide maintenance after
ASCT and are progressing (lenalidomide-refractory patients), according to previous guidelines, could receive
either K plus dexamethasone (Kd) or Dara and bortezomib
plus dexamethasone (DaraVd) (patients treated with Kd or
DaraVd had signiﬁcantly improved PFS compared with
Vd).60,61 Three phase III studies suggest that the combination of pomalidomide with bortezomib and dexamethasone
(PomVd) and the combinations of Dara or Isa with K and
dexamethasone (DaraKd or IsaKd) are new options for this
setting.60-62 In the ﬁrst study, PomVd (n ¼ 278) was
compared with Vd (n ¼ 270) in RRMM patients who had
received 1-3 prior lines of therapy that included lenalidomide. More than 70% of the patients were refractory to
lenalidomide. After a median follow-up of 16 months,
Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Annals of Oncology

PomVd improved mPFS in the study population (11.2 versus
7.1 months; HR 0.61; P < 0.0001) as well as in patients
refractory to lenalidomide (9.5 versus 5.6 months; P ¼
0.0008) and in patients refractory to lenalidomide who
received only 1 prior line of treatment (17.8 versus 9.5
months; P ¼ 0.03).62 PomVd was approved by the EMA in
May 2019.
In the second study (CANDOR), DaraKd was compared
with Kd in RRMM patients who had received 1 prior line of
therapy. This study showed that the mPFS was not reached
for the DaraKd group and it was 15.8 months for the Kd
group (HR 0.63; P ¼ 0.0014). DaraKd resulted in a better
PFS beneﬁt both among lenalidomide-exposed (HR 0.52)
and lenalidomide-refractory patients (HR 0.45).63
Finally, in the third study, which was reported at the
European Hematology Association (EHA) 2020 meeting,
only 302 patients with RRMM and 1-3 prior lines of therapy
were randomised to receive either IsaKd (n ¼ 179) or Kd
(n ¼ 123). At a median follow-up of 20.7 months, mPFS was
not reached for IsaKd whereas it was 19.1 months for Kd
(HR 0.53; P ¼ 0.0007).64
Thus, PomVd, DaraKd and IsaKd are recommended
therapies for patients who were previously exposed or are
refractory to lenalidomide, while DaraKd or IsaKd can also
be given in patients who are refractory to bortezomib.
The approval of Dara-based regimens (DaraVTD, DaraVMP
and DaraRd) and of VRd, as ﬁrst-line therapy for myeloma
patients, makes the treatment of second and subsequent lines
of therapy very challenging. Although there is some evidence
that Dara retreatment can be efﬁcacious in some patients,65,66
there are no data for Dara retreatment at second line.
Venetoclax is a selective Bcl-2 inhibitor that promotes MM
cell apoptosis. The phase III BELLINI trial evaluated the combination of venetoclax with Vd (VenVd) compared with Vd
among RRMM patients, who had received 1-3 prior lines of
therapy and were PI-sensitive. A signiﬁcant PFS beneﬁt was
reported with VenVd among patients with t(11;14) (HR 0.10;
P ¼ 0.003) and those with high BCL2 expression (HR 0.26;
P < 0.001) but no OS difference was shown in this population.
On the contrary, Vd was superior to VenVd in terms of OS
among patients without t(11;14) and low BCL2 (HR 3.13;
P ¼ 0.019).67 Therefore, VenVd is an option only for patients
with t(11;14) or high BCL2 levels who have failed lenalidomide
and are sensitive to PI. VenVd is awaiting EMA approval.
Selinexor is an oral, selective inhibitor of XPO1-mediated
nuclear export, leading to the reactivation of tumoursuppressor proteins. Selinexor in combination with Vd
(SVd) was compared with Vd in a phase III study with 402
patients with RRMM who received 1-3 prior lines of therapy. SVd signiﬁcantly prolonged mPFS compared with Vd
(13.9 versus 9.4 months, HR 0.70, P ¼ 0.0066), suggesting
that SVd might be another option in patients who were
treated with lenalidomide-based regimens upfront.68 SVd is
awaiting EMA approval.
In Figure 2, the possible options for second-line therapy,
taking into consideration the previous line and the

Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

refractoriness to speciﬁc agents, are described. For Darapreviously exposed or -refractory patients, the recommendations are based on panel opinion as there is no evidence
for the efﬁcacy of the approved second-line regimens in
these patients to date.
Patients who have received two or more prior lines of
therapy
Treatment of RRMM patients who received two or more
prior lines of therapy is becoming challenging.69 A recent
study revealed that patients who are refractory to two PIs,
two IMiDs and a CD38 mAb have an mOS of 5.6 months
only.70 For patients who have been exposed or are refractory to both bortezomib and lenalidomide, who have
not received an mAb, DaraKd or IsaKd are suitable options.
The combinations of Elo or Isa with pomalidomide and
dexamethasone (EloPd and IsaPd, respectively) are suitable
options for patients who have failed 2 lines of previous
therapies, including lenalidomide and a PI, based on the
results of two studies. The ﬁrst was a phase II study, in
which patients were randomly assigned to receive either
EloPd (n ¼ 60) or Pd (n ¼ 57). After a follow-up period of
9 months, the mPFS was 10.3 months in the EloPd group
and 4.7 in the Pd group (HR 0.54; P ¼ 0.008).71 The second
was a phase III study, in which patients were randomised to
receive either IsaPd (n ¼ 154) or Pd (n ¼ 153). At a median
follow-up of 11.6 months, mPFS was 11.5 months in the
IsaPd group versus 6.5 months in the Pd group (HR 0.596;
P ¼ 0.001).72 EloPd and IsaPd were recently approved by
the EMA in this setting.
The combination of Dara with pomalidomide and dexamethasone (DaraPd) has been approved by the FDA for
patients who have failed 2 lines of previous therapies,
including lenalidomide and a PI. This was based on a phase
II non-randomised study where DaraPd was given in 103
patients with RRMM. At a median follow-up of 13 months,
the mPFS was 8.8 months and the mOS was 17.5 months.73
DaraPd has not yet been approved by the EMA, as the results of the phase III APOLLO study (DaraPd versus Pd) are
pending.
Patients with t(11;14), who are refractory to lenalidomide
and are PI-sensitive may be treated with VenVd, when this
regimen is licensed, as previously discussed.
For
triple-class
refractory
patients,
selinexordexamethasone (Sd) or belantamab mafodotin monotherapy may be suitable options. In a phase II study with
122 RRMM patients (median number of 7 prior lines of
therapy), oral selinexor was given with dexamethasone
twice weekly. An mPFS of 3.7 months and an mOS of 8.6
months were reported. Fatigue, nausea and decreased
appetite were common and were typically grade 1 or 2
events; grade 3 events were noted in up to 25% of patients
and no grade 4 events were reported.74
Belantamab mafodotin is an antibody-drug conjugate
targeting B-cell maturation antigen (BCMA). In a phase II
study, 196 patients with triple-class refractory MM received

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

315

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

Lenalidomidesensitive

Lenalidomiderefractory

Bortezomibsensitive

KRd [I, A]
DaraRd [I, A]
EloRd [I, A]
PomVd [I, A]
DaraKd [I, A]
IsaKd [I, A]
IxaRd [I, A]
SVd [I, A]

PomVd [I, A]
DaraKd [I, A]
IsaKd [I, A]
SVd [I, A]

KRd [I, A]
DaraRd [I, A]
EloRd [I, A]
PomVd [I, A]
DaraKd [I, ,A]
DaraVd [I, A]
IsaKd [I, A]
SVd [I, A]
VenVda [I, A]

Lenalidomide
and bortezomibrefractory

DaraKd [I, A]
IsaKd [I, A]

Second-line options after DaraVMPb,c
or DaraVTDb,c

Lenalidomidesensitive

Lenalidomiderefractory

Bortezomibsensitive

Bortezomibrefractory

PomVd
Kd
EloRd
KRd
IxaRd
SVd
VenVda

PomVd
Kd
SVd
VenVda

EloRd
KRd
IxaRd
VRd
SVd
Kd
VenVda

EloRd

Annals of Oncology

316
Second-line options after DaraRdb,c

Second-line options after VRd

Figure 2. Second-line options for MM patients who received VRd and Dara-based front-line therapies.
The three different ﬂow-charts shown in this ﬁgure depict three different scenariosddepending on the ﬁrst-line treatment given (from left to right):
 second-line options after VRd ﬁrst-line treatment
 second-line options after DaraRd ﬁrst-line treatment and
 second-line options after DaraVMP or DaraVTD ﬁrst-line treatment.
Dara, daratumumab; Elo, elotuzumab; Isa, isatuximab; Ixa, ixazomib; K, carﬁlzomib; Kd, carﬁlzomib/dexamethasone; MM, multiple myeloma; PomVd, pomalidomide/bortezomib/dexamethasone; Rd, lenalidomide/dexamethasone;
S, selinexor; Vd, bortezomib/dexamethasone; VMP, bortezomib/melphalan/prednislone; VRd, bortezomib/lenalidomide/dexamethasone; Ven, venetoclax; VTD, bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone.
a
Patients with t(11;14).
b
Patients who progress while on monthly Dara are considered as Dara-refractory.
c
All recommendations for patients who receive front-line therapy with Dara-based therapies are based on panel consensus as there are no trials evaluating regimens in second-line therapy that include patients refractory or exposed
to Dara.

-

Issue 3
-

2021

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Volume 32

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Volume 32

At second or subsequent relapse

-

Issue 3
-

2021

Lenalidomide and
bortezomib refractory

Lenalidomide refractory
and PI sensitive

Alternative
(less preferred) options

For triple-class refractory
patients (PIs, IMiDs and
mAbs against CD38)

DaraKd [I, A]
IsaPd [I, A]
EloPd [II, B]
IsaKd [I, A]
DaraPd [II, B]a

DaraKd [I, A]
IsaPd [I, A]
EloPd [II, B]
IsaKd [I, A]
DaraPd [II, B]
DaraVd [I, A]
SVd [I, A]
VenVd [I, A]b

PCd [II, B]
Daratumumab [I, A]

Sd [II, B]
Belantamab mafodotin [II, B]

Clinical trials

317

Annals of Oncology

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

Figure 3. Recommendations for MM patients who receive a third or subsequent line of therapy.
Dara, daratumumab; Elo, elotuzumab; IMiD, immunomodulatory drug; Isa, isatuximab; Kd, carﬁlzomib/dexamethasone; mAb, monoclonal antibody; MM, multiple myeloma; PCd, pomalidomide/cyclophosphamide/dexamethasone;
Pd, pomalidomide/dexamethasone; PI, proteasome inhibitor; S, selinexor; Sd, selinexor/dexamethasone; Vd, bortezomib/dexamethasone; Ven, venetoclax.
a
Only phase IB data are published for DaraPd. Publication of phase III data are expected in 2021.
b
For patients with t(11;14) or high BCL2 levels.

Annals of Oncology
two different doses of belantamab mafodotin (2.5 and
3.4 mg/kg). The mPFS was 2.9 and 4.9 months for the two
doses, respectively. The most common grade 3-4 adverse
events included keratopathy (27% and 21% of patients for
the two doses, respectively), thrombocytopaenia and
anaemia.75 Melﬂufen may also be beneﬁcial in Dara and
pomalidomide-refractory patients but the results of the
phase III trial have not yet been reported.76
Figure 3 summarises the recommendations for RRMM
patients who receive third or subsequent lines of therapy.
Immunotherapy strategies targeting BCMA or other antigens on the surface of myeloma cells, including bispeciﬁc
T-cell engagers (BiTEs) and chimeric antigen receptor
T (CAR-T) cells, are under clinical investigation in RRMM
patients. Results for the ﬁrst published study with a CAR-T
cell product in myeloma patients showed that infusion of
bb2121 in 33 consecutive patients with multi-refractory
disease resulted in an objective response rate of 85%,
including 15 patients (45%) with CR; all were MRD-negative.
The mPFS was 11.8 months. CAR-T cell expansion was
associated with better responses and CAR-T cells persisted
up to 1 year after the infusion. A total of 25 patients (76%)
had cytokine release syndrome, while neurological toxic
effects occurred in 14 patients (42%).77 Several studies
using other CAR-T cell products or T-cell engagers (TCEs)
were reported in the American Society of Clinical
Oncology (ASCO) and EHA 2020 meetings and had similar
results, suggesting that these immunotherapy techniques
may increase survival of myeloma patients (see
Supplementary Material, available at https://doi.org/10.1
016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, section on novel immunotherapies for myeloma).
Recommendations
Patients who receive second-line therapy
 Second-line ASCT is an option for patients who received
primary therapy that included an ASCT followed by lenalidomide maintenance and had an initial remission duration of 36 months (panel consensus).
 Patients who had received a bortezomib-based therapy
upfront without lenalidomide or Dara should receive an
Rd-based regimen, i.e. KRd, DaraRd, IRd or EloRd [I, A].
DaraRd provides the best PFS for these patients, while
only KRd and EloRd showed an OS beneﬁt over Rd to date.
 Patients who are refractory to lenalidomide upfront
could receive either PomVD, DaraKd, IsaKd or DaraVd
[I, A]. PomVd is the approved indication with best
results, in terms of PFS, as second-line therapy in
lenalidomide-refractory patients. DaraKd has given the
best reported PFS to date in lenalidomide-refractory patients, but DaraKd is awaiting EMA approval. Similarly,
IsaKd and SVd, which are also suitable for this setting
[I, A], have not yet been approved by the EMA.
 VenVd is a suitable option for patients with t(11;14) who
have failed lenalidomide and are sensitive to PIs [I, A], if
available.
318

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Patients at third and subsequent lines of treatment
 For patients who have been exposed or are refractory to
both bortezomib and lenalidomide, DaraKd [I, A], IsaPd
[I, A], IsaKd [I, A] and EloPd [II, B] are recommended.
 Patients with t(11;14), who are refractory to lenalidomide and are PI-sensitive may be treated with VenVd
[I, A], if available.
 For triple-class refractory patients, Sd or belantamab
mafodotin monotherapy is recommended [II, B], if available. Results of phase III studies of melﬂufen, TCEs and
CAR-Ts in triple-class refractory patients are awaited.
MANAGEMENT OF PLASMA CELL LEUKAEMIA
Primary plasma cell leukaemia (PPCL) is a rare and aggressive variant of MM, operationally deﬁned by the presence
of 20% and/or an absolute number >2  109/l of clonal
plasma cells in the peripheral blood without a previous
history of MM.78 The cut-off value of circulating plasma
cells for the deﬁnition of PCL may be reduced to 5% in the
near future, as the survival of these patients is similar to
those with 20% of circulating plasma cells.74 PPCL should be
distinguished from secondary PCL, which generally constitutes the leukaemic evolution of a pre-existing, end-stage
RRMM, and from extramedullary myeloma. Diagnostic
work-up and staging procedures in PPCL are similar to those
applied in MM. However, they have to be implemented by
peripheral blood analysis for measuring circulating PC count
and PET-CT for detecting possible extramedullary lesions.79
The outcome of patients with PCL remains poor and the
mOS is around 1 year.78,79 There are no precise guidelines
for the treatment of PPCL due to the lack of phase III trials
in this setting. Only two prospective phase II studies have
been published so far for PPCL.80,81 Overall, treatment
should be immediate and possibly oriented toward bortezomib and/or lenalidomide-based multiphase approaches in
combination with chemotherapy agents, with short
treatment-free intervals. It should ideally include induction,
double ASCT, consolidation and maintenance [II, B]. KRd
may be another option for these patients82 but more data
are needed before a recommendation can be made for PCL
patients.
Allo-SCT should be considered in selected cases [III, C]. In
a recent study, 71 patients (median age 56 years) with PPCL
underwent an allo-SCT and the 4-year outcomes were: nonrelapse mortality 12%, PFS 19% and OS 31%.83 Thus, in
patients younger than 50 years of age with a suitable donor,
a myeloablative allo-SCT can be considered. Otherwise, a
tandem transplant with an ASCT followed by a reducedintensity conditioning allo-SCT if a related or an unrelated
donor is available can be considered [IV, C].
Patients not eligible for transplant procedures should
preferably receive continuous treatment [III, C]. In relapsed/
refractory PPCL, a switch to drugs not used at diagnosis
should be considered, favouring combinations of lenalidomide or pomalidomide plus dexamethasone with K or mAbs
Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Annals of Oncology

(Dara or Elo) (expert consensus). See Supplementary
Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.annonc.202
0.11.014, for summary recommendations.

addition of quadruplet combinations including mAbs as
part of front-line therapies and novel immunotherapy
strategies seems to further increase this apparent cure
rate.

MANAGEMENT OF SOLITARY PLASMACYTOMA
Solitary plasmacytoma is an infrequent form of plasma cell
neoplasm that presents as a single mass of monoclonal
plasma cells, with either extramedullary or intraosseous
location.84,85 Clonal PCs are typically absent in the BM
aspirate by conventional morphology or immunohistochemistry and there are no other MM features (hypercalcaemia, anaemia or renal disease attributable to MM).8
In some patients, a BM aspiration can detect a low monoclonal plasma cell inﬁltration, which indicates a high risk of
early progression to an overt myeloma disease.84,85
Furthermore, in a study following the use of high sensitivity ﬂow cytometry, half of the patients showed occult BM
inﬁltration and half of these cases progressed at 2 years.86
Thus, detection of clonal PC using sensitive techniques in
the BM is suggested [II, B] and systemic treatment of
myeloma should be considered in these patients [III, B].
Before treatment initiation, whole-body magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and PET-CT should be carried out to
exclude the presence of multiple plasmacytomas, commending systemic treatment instead of radiotherapy (RT) [I,
A].6,87 Local high-dose RT is the preferred treatment of
choice [II, A], but about two-thirds of patients develop MM
at 10 years’ follow-up.88 With current staging techniques,
i.e. NGF and PET-CT, the incidence of solitary plasmacytoma
is expected to decrease and the cure rate to increase. See
Supplementary Table S6, available at https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, for summary recommendations.
SUPPORTIVE CARE
Recommendations for the management of myeloma complications, i.e. bone disease, anaemia, BM failure, infections,
vaccination strategies and renal impairment, are described
in the Supplementary Material, available at https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014, in the section on Supportive Care.

PERSONALISED MEDICINE
The presence of t(11;14) in RRMM patients should be
investigated to decide for venetoclax-based regimens, when
available in Europe. Otherwise, no prognostic factor or
staging system, including R-ISS or gene-expression proﬁling,
is used routinely to deﬁne a risk-adapted strategy. In
myeloma, more research is needed to identify molecular
markers which could lead to advances in personalised
medicine.
METHODOLOGY
These Clinical Practice Guidelines were developed in accordance with the ESMO standard operating procedures for
Clinical Practice Guidelines development www.esmo.org/
Guidelines/ESMO-Guidelines-Methodology. An interdisciplinary panel of clinical experts on MM, members of ESMO,
EHA and EMN, selected the relevant literature. Levels of
evidence and grades of recommendations were assigned
according to the adapted Infectious Diseases Society of
America-United States Public Health Service Grading System
(Supplementary Table S7, available at https://doi.org/10.1
016/j.annonc. 2020.11.014).89 Statements without grading
were considered justiﬁed standard clinical practice by the
experts.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The authors thank all those who contributed to this
manuscript on behalf of the EHA and ESMO.
FUNDING
No external funding has been received for the preparation
of these guidelines. Production costs have been covered by
ESMO from central funds.
DISCLOSURE

FOLLOW-UP AND LONG-TERM IMPLICATIONS
Table 1 includes all tests that have to be carried out during
follow-up of myeloma patients. Full blood count, serum and
urine electrophoresis and serum-free light chain (sFLC)
determination, creatinine and calcium tests should be carried
out monthly or at least every 3 months. sFLC should be used
to detect light chain escape. In cases of relapsed patients with
no positivity for del17p or add1q at diagnosis, FISH analysis
for del17p and add1q should be carried out to reveal high-risk
relapse. In case of bone pain, whole-body low-dose CT
(WBLD-CT), MRI or PET-CT should be carried out to detect
new bone lesions.85
MM has for a long time been considered as an incurable
disease. Recent trials incorporating novel agents and ASCT
report a statistical cure fraction of more than 15%.1,22 The
Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

MAD reported consultancy and honoraria from Janssen,
Celgene, Takeda, Amgen and Bristol Myers Squibb; PM reported honoraria from Celgene, Janssen, Takeda, Amgen and
Abbvie; ET reported honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb,
Janssen, Celgene, Takeda, Genesis Pharma, Amgen, Sanoﬁ
and Novartis; research funding from Janssen, Amgen, Takeda,
Sanoﬁ and Genesis Pharma; MVM reported honoraria from
lectures and boards from Janssen, Celgene, Amgen, Takeda,
Abbvie, GlaxoSmithKline, Adaptive, Roche and Seattle Genetics; SZ reported participation in advisory boards for
Takeda, Celgene, Janssen, Sanoﬁ and Oncopeptides and
research funding from Celgene, Janssen and Takeda; GC reported being a member of speaker bureau for Takeda, Bristol
Myers Squibb, Celgene, Amgen, Sanoﬁ and Janssen and has
received research grants from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

319

Annals of Oncology
and Takeda; MD reported honoraria from Abbvie, Adaptive
Biotechnologies, Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene,
Janssen, Karyopharm, Sanoﬁ and Takeda and has received
research funding from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen
and Takeda; RH reported consultant or advisory roles for
Janssen, Amgen, Celgene, AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Novartis, PharmaMar and Takeda; honoraria from Janssen,
Amgen, Celgene, Bristol Myers Squibb, PharmaMar and
Takeda and has received research grants from Janssen,
Amgen, Celgene, Bristol Myers Squibb, Novartis and Takeda;
FS reported honoraria from Amgen, Celgene, Bristol Myers
Squibb, Takeda, Abbvie, Janssen, Novartis, SkyliteDX, Oncopeptides, Sanoﬁ, GlaxoSmithKline, Adaptive and Merck Sharp
& Dohme; MC reported honoraria from Janssen, Celgene,
Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Takeda, AbbVie, Sanoﬁ and
Adaptive Biotechnologies and speaker’s bureau membership
for Janssen and Celgene; HG reported grants from Amgen,
Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Chugai, Dietmar-HoppFoundation, Janssen, John Hopkins University and Sanoﬁ;
research support from Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Celgene, Chugai, Janssen, Incyte, Molecular Partners, Merck
Sharp & Dohme, Sanoﬁ, Mundipharma, Takeda and Novartis;
participation in advisory boards for Adaptive Biotechnology,
Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Sanoﬁ and
Takeda; honoraria from Academy2 GmbH & Co. KG, Amgen,
ArtTempi, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Chop GmbH,
Chugai, FomF GmbH, GlaxoSmithKline, GWT Forschung und
Innovation Dresden, InVo Institut für Versorgungsforschung
in der Onkologie GbR, Janssen, Kompetenznetz Maligne
Lymphome (KML), MedConcept GmbH, Medical Communication GmbH, New Concept Oncology, Novartis, Omnia Med
Deutschland and Sanoﬁ; TF reported speaker and advisory
roles for Janssen, Bristol Myers Squibb and Takeda; role for
Roche, Sanoﬁ, Karyopharm and Oncopeptides and speaker
role for Amgen; HE reported consulting and advisory roles for
Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, Takeda,
Sanoﬁ and GlaxoSmithKline; research funding from Bristol
Myers Squibb, Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, GlaxoSmithKline
and Sanoﬁ; honoraria from Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene,
Amgen, Takeda, Sanoﬁ and GlaxoSmithKline; MB has
received honoraria from Sanoﬁ, Celgene, Amgen, Janssen,
Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb and AbbVie; has served on
advisory boards for Janssen and GlaxoSmithKline; has
received research funding from Sanoﬁ, Celgene, Amgen,
Janssen, Novartis, Bristol Myers Squibb and Mundipharma;
JS-M reported consultancy for Amgen, Bristol Myers Squibb,
Celgene, Janssen, Merck Sharp & Dohme, Novartis,
GlaxoSmithKline, Takeda, Sanoﬁ and Roche; PS reported
honoraria and advisory roles for Celgene, Janssen, Amgen,
Takeda, Bristol Myers Squibb and Skyline and research
funding from Celgene, Amgen, Janssen and Takeda; UM reported honoraria from Celgene, Janssen, Amgen, Takeda,
AbbVie, Bristol Myers Squibb and Sanoﬁ.
REFERENCES
1. Usmani SZ, Hoering A, Cavo M, et al. Clinical predictors of long-term
survival in newly diagnosed transplant eligible multiple myeloma an IMWG Research Project. Blood Cancer J. 2018;8:123.

320

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.
2. Moreau P, San Miguel J, Sonneveld P, et al. Multiple myeloma: ESMO
Clinical Practice Guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and follow-up. Ann
Oncol. 2017;28:iv52-iv61.
3. Kumar S, Paiva B, Anderson KC, et al. International Myeloma
Working Group consensus criteria for response and minimal residual
disease assessment in multiple myeloma. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17:
e328-e346.
4. Perrot A, Lauwers-Cances V, Corre J, et al. Minimal residual disease
negativity using deep sequencing is a major prognostic factor in
multiple myeloma. Blood. 2018;132:2456-2464.
5. Munshi NC, Avet-Loiseau H, Rawstron AC, et al. Association of minimal
residual disease with superior survival outcomes in patients with
multiple myeloma: a meta-analysis. JAMA Oncol. 2017;3:28-35.
6. Cavo M, Terpos E, Nanni C, et al. Role of (18)F-FDG PET/CT in the
diagnosis and management of multiple myeloma and other plasma cell
disorders: a consensus statement by the International Myeloma
Working Group. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18:e206-e217.
7. Avet-Loiseau H, Ludwig H, Landgren O, et al. Minimal residual disease
status as a surrogate endpoint for progression-free survival in newly
diagnosed multiple myeloma studies: a meta-analysis. Clin Lymphoma
Myeloma Leuk. 2020;20:e30-e37.
8. Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, Palumbo A, et al. International
Myeloma Working Group updated criteria for the diagnosis of multiple
myeloma. Lancet Oncol. 2014;15:e538-548.
9. Rajkumar SV, Landgren O, Mateos MV. Smoldering multiple myeloma.
Blood. 2015;125:3069-3075.
10. Mateos MV, Hernandez MT, Giraldo P, et al. Lenalidomide plus dexamethasone for high-risk smoldering multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med.
2013;369:438-447.
11. Mateos MV, Hernandez MT, Giraldo P, et al. Lenalidomide plus dexamethasone versus observation in patients with high-risk smouldering
multiple myeloma (QuiRedex): long-term follow-up of a randomised,
controlled, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2016;17:1127-1136.
12. Lonial S, Jacobus S, Fonseca R, et al. Randomized trial of lenalidomide
versus observation in smoldering multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol.
2020;38:1126-1137.
13. Landgren CO, Chari A, Cohen YC, et al. Daratumumab monotherapy for
patients with intermediate-risk or high-risk smoldering multiple
myeloma: a randomized, open-label, multicenter, phase 2 study
(CENTAURUS). Leukemia. 2020;34:1840-1852.
14. Cavo M, Gay F, Patriarca F, et al. Double autologous stem cell transplantation signiﬁcantly prolongs progression-free survival and overall
survival in comparison with single autotransplantation in newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: an analysis of phase 3 EMN02/HO95 study.
Blood. 2017;130(suppl 1):401.
15. Attal M, Lauwers-Cances V, Hulin C, et al. Lenalidomide, bortezomib,
and dexamethasone with transplantation for myeloma. N Engl J Med.
2017;376:1311-1320.
16. Cavo M, Gay F, Beksac M, et al. Autologous haematopoietic stem-cell
transplantation versus bortezomib-melphalan-prednisone, with or
without bortezomib-lenalidomide-dexamethasone consolidation therapy, and lenalidomide maintenance for newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma (EMN02/HO95): a multicentre, randomised, open-label,
phase 3 study. Lancet Haematol. 2020;7:e456-e468.
17. Sonneveld P, Goldschmidt H, Rosinol L, et al. Bortezomib-based versus
nonbortezomib-based induction treatment before autologous stemcell transplantation in patients with previously untreated multiple
myeloma: a meta-analysis of phase III randomized, controlled trials.
J Clin Oncol. 2013;31:3279-3287.
18. Moreau P, Hulin C, Macro M, et al. VTD is superior to VCD prior to
intensive therapy in multiple myeloma: results of the prospective
IFM2013-04 trial. Blood. 2016;127:2569-2574.
19. Mai EK, Bertsch U, Durig J, et al. Phase III trial of bortezomib, cyclophosphamide and dexamethasone (VCD) versus bortezomib, doxorubicin and dexamethasone (PAd) in newly diagnosed myeloma.
Leukemia. 2015;29:1721-1729.
20. Rosinol L, Oriol A, Rios R, et al. Bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone as induction therapy prior to autologous transplant in
multiple myeloma. Blood. 2019;134:1337-1345.

Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.

Annals of Oncology

21. Voorhees PM, Kaufman JL, Laubach JP, et al. Daratumumab, lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone for transplant-eligible newly
diagnosed multiple myeloma: the GRIFFIN trial. Blood. 2020;136:936945.
22. Joseph NS, Kaufman JL, Dhodapkar MV, et al. Long-term follow-up
results of lenalidomide, bortezomib, and dexamethasone induction
therapy and risk-adapted maintenance approach in newly diagnosed
multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38:1928-1937.
23. Rosinol L, Hebraud B, Oriol A, et al. Integrated analysis of bortezomiblenalidomide-dexamethasone vs bortezomib-thalidomide-dexamethasone
in transplant-eligible newly diagnosed myeloma. Clin Lymphoma
Myeloma Leuk. 2019;19(suppl):E1-E2.
24. Moreau P, Attal M, Hulin C, et al. Bortezomib, thalidomide, and
dexamethasone with or without daratumumab before and after
autologous stem-cell transplantation for newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma (CASSIOPEIA): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 study.
Lancet. 2019;394:29-38.
25. Moreau P, Attal M, Hulin C, et al. Phase 3 randomized study of
daratumumab þ bortezomib/thalidomide/dexamethasone (D-VTd) vs
VTd in transplant-eligible newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: CASSIOPEIA Part 1 results. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(suppl 15):8003.
26. Gay F, Cerrato C, Petrucci M, et al. Efﬁcacy of carﬁlzomib lenalidomide
dexamethasone (KRd) with or without transplantation in newly diagnosed myeloma according to risk status: results from the FORTE trial.
J Clin Oncol. 2019;37(suppl 15):8002.
27. Blanes M, Lahuerta JJ, Gonzalez JD, et al. Intravenous busulfan and
melphalan as a conditioning regimen for autologous stem cell transplantation in patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma: a
matched comparison to a melphalan-only approach. Biol Blood
Marrow Transplant. 2013;19:69-74.
28. Blanes M, Lorenzo JI, Ribas P, et al. Intravenous busulfan plus
melphalan versus melphalan alone as conditioning regimen for patients with multiple myeloma. Ann Hematol. 2019;98:2013-2015.
29. Roussel M, Hebraud B, Lauwers-Cances V, et al. Bortezomib and highdose melphalan vs. high-dose melphalan as conditioning regimen
before autologous stem cell transplantation in de novo multiple
myeloma patients: a phase 3 study of the Intergroupe Francophone Du
Myelome (IFM 2014-02). Blood. 2017;130(suppl 1):398.
30. Stadtmauer EA, Pasquini MC, Blackwell B, et al. Autologous transplantation, consolidation, and maintenance therapy in multiple myeloma:
results of the BMT CTN 0702 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2019;37:589-597.
31. Hari P, Pasquini M, Stadtmauer E, et al. Long-term follow-up of BMT
CTN 0702 (STaMINA) of postautologous hematopoietic cell transplantation (autoHCT) strategies in the upfront treatment of multiple
myeloma (MM). J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 15):8506.
32. Giralt S, Costa LJ, Maloney D, et al. Tandem autologous-autologous
versus autologous-allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplant for
patients with multiple myeloma: long-term follow-up results from the
Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical Trials Network 0102 Trial. Biol
Blood Marrow Transplant. 2020;26:798-804.
33. Attal M, Lauwers-Cances V, Marit G, et al. Lenalidomide maintenance
after stem-cell transplantation for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med.
2012;366:1782-1791.
34. McCarthy PL, Owzar K, Hofmeister CC, et al. Lenalidomide after stemcell transplantation for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2012;366:
1770-1781.
35. McCarthy PL, Holstein SA, Petrucci MT, et al. Lenalidomide maintenance after autologous stem-cell transplantation in newly
diagnosed multiple myeloma: a meta-analysis. J Clin Oncol. 2017;35:
3279-3289.
36. Jackson GH, Davies FE, Pawlyn C, et al. Lenalidomide maintenance
versus observation for patients with newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma (Myeloma XI): a multicentre, open-label, randomised, phase
3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20:57-73.
37. Goldschmidt H, Lokhorst HM, Mai EK, et al. Bortezomib before and
after high-dose therapy in myeloma: long-term results from the phase
III HOVON-65/GMMG-HD4 trial. Leukemia. 2018;32:383-390.
38. Dimopoulos MA, Gay F, Schjesvold F, et al. Oral ixazomib maintenance
following autologous stem cell transplantation (TOURMALINE-MM3): a

Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

39.

40.

41.

42.

43.

44.

45.

46.

47.

48.

49.

50.

51.

52.

53.

54.

55.

double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2019;393:253-264.
San Miguel JF, Schlag R, Khuageva NK, et al. Bortezomib plus
melphalan and prednisone for initial treatment of multiple myeloma.
N Engl J Med. 2008;359:906-917.
Benboubker L, Dimopoulos MA, Dispenzieri A, et al. Lenalidomide and
dexamethasone in transplant-ineligible patients with myeloma. N Engl
J Med. 2014;371:906-917.
Durie BGM, Hoering A, Abidi MH, et al. Bortezomib with lenalidomide
and dexamethasone versus lenalidomide and dexamethasone alone in
patients with newly diagnosed myeloma without intent for immediate
autologous stem-cell transplant (SWOG S0777): a randomised, openlabel, phase 3 trial. Lancet. 2017;389:519-527.
Kumar S, Jacobus S, Cohen A, et al. Carﬁlzomib, lenalidomide, and
dexamethasone (KRd) versus bortezomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone (VRd) for initial therapy of newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma (NDMM): results of ENDURANCE (E1A11) phase III trial. J Clin
Oncol. 2020;38(suppl18). abstr LBA3.
Mateos MV, Dimopoulos MA, Cavo M, et al. Daratumumab plus bortezomib, melphalan, and prednisone for untreated myeloma. N Engl J
Med. 2018;378:518-528.
Mateos MV, Cavo M, Blade J, et al. Overall survival with daratumumab,
bortezomib, melphalan, and prednisone in newly diagnosed multiple
myeloma (ALCYONE): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet.
2020;395:132-141.
Facon T, Kumar S, Plesner T, et al. Daratumumab plus lenalidomide and
dexamethasone for untreated myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:21042115.
Ponisch W, Mitrou PS, Merkle K, et al. Treatment of bendamustine and
prednisone in patients with newly diagnosed multiple myeloma results
in superior complete response rate, prolonged time to treatment
failure and improved quality of life compared to treatment with
melphalan and prednisone–a randomized phase III study of the East
German Study Group of Hematology and Oncology (OSHO). J Cancer
Res Clin Oncol. 2006;132:205-212.
Palumbo A, Hajek R, Delforge M, et al. Continuous lenalidomide
treatment for newly diagnosed multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med.
2012;366:1759-1769.
Dimopoulos M, Spicka I, Quach H, et al. Ixazomib as postinduction
maintenance for patients with newly diagnosed multiple lyeloma not
undergoing autologous stem cell transplantation: The phase III
TOURMALINE-MM4 trial. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(34):4030-4041.
Cook G, Ashcroft AJ, Cairns DA, et al. The effect of salvage autologous
stem-cell transplantation on overall survival in patients with relapsed
multiple myeloma (ﬁnal results from BSBMT/UKMF Myeloma X
Relapse [Intensive]): a randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet
Haematol. 2016;3:e340-351.
Goldschmidt H, Baertsch MA, Schlenzka J, et al. Salvage autologous
transplant and lenalidomide maintenance vs. lenalidomide/
dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma: the randomized
GMMG phase III trial ReLApsE. Leukemia. 2020. In press.
Giralt S, Garderet L, Durie B, et al. American Society of Blood and
Marrow Transplantation, European Society of Blood and Marrow
Transplantation, Blood and Marrow Transplant Clinical Trials Network,
and International Myeloma Working Group consensus conference on
salvage hematopoietic cell transplantation in patients with relapsed
multiple myeloma. Biol Blood Marrow Transplant. 2015;21:2039-2051.
Miller KC, Gertz MA, Buadi FK, et al. The impact of re-induction prior to
salvage autologous stem cell transplantation in multiple myeloma.
Bone Marrow Transplant. 2019;54:2039-2050.
Stewart AK, Rajkumar SV, Dimopoulos MA, et al. Carﬁlzomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone for relapsed multiple myeloma. N Engl J
Med. 2015;372:142-152.
Dimopoulos MA, Oriol A, Nahi H, et al. Daratumumab, lenalidomide,
and dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2016;375:
1319-1331.
Moreau P, Masszi T, Grzasko N, et al. Oral ixazomib, lenalidomide, and
dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2016;374:16211634.

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

321

Annals of Oncology
56. Lonial S, Dimopoulos M, Palumbo A, et al. Elotuzumab therapy for relapsed
or refractory multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2015;373:621-631.
57. Siegel DS, Dimopoulos MA, Ludwig H, et al. Improvement in overall survival with carﬁlzomib, lenalidomide, and dexamethasone in patients with
relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. J Clin Oncol. 2018;36:728-734.
58. Dimopoulos M, Weisel K, Lonial S, et al. Elotuzumab plus lenalidomide/
dexamethasone for relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma: Final
overall survival results from the phase 3 ELOQUENT-2 trial. 17th
International Myeloma Workshop, Boston, September 12-15, 2019.
Abstract OAB-021.
59. Harousseau JL, Dimopoulos MA, Wang M, et al. Better quality of
response to lenalidomide plus dexamethasone is associated with
improved clinical outcomes in patients with relapsed or refractory
multiple myeloma. Haematologica. 2010;95:1738-1744.
60. Dimopoulos MA, Goldschmidt H, Niesvizky R, et al. Carﬁlzomib or
bortezomib in relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (ENDEAVOR):
an interim overall survival analysis of an open-label, randomised,
phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2017;18:1327-1337.
61. Palumbo A, Chanan-Khan A, Weisel K, et al. Daratumumab, bortezomib, and dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med.
2016;375:754-766.
62. Richardson PG, Oriol A, Beksac M, et al. Pomalidomide, bortezomib,
and dexamethasone for patients with relapsed or refractory multiple
myeloma previously treated with lenalidomide (OPTIMISMM): a
randomised, open-label, phase 3 trial. Lancet Oncol. 2019;20:781-794.
63. Usmani S, Quach H, Mateos M-V, et al. Carﬁlzomib, dexamethasone,
and daratumumab versus carﬁlzomib and dexamethasone for the
treatment of patients with relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma
(RRMM): Primary analysis results from the randomized, open-label,
phase 3 study Candor (NCT03158688). Blood. 2019;134. LBA-6.
64. Moreau P, Dimopoulos M, Mikhael J, et al. Isatuximab plus carﬁlzomib
and dexamethasone vs carﬁlzomib and dexamethasone in relapsed/
refractory multiple myeloma (IKEMA): interim analysis of a phase 3,
randomized, open-label study. Presented at: The European Hematology
Association 25th Annual Congress; June 11-21, 2020: Virtual Congress.
Abstract LBA2603.
65. Gavriatopoulou M, Kastritis E, Ntanasis-Stathopoulos I, et al.The addition
of IMiDs for patients with daratumumab-refractory multiple myeloma
can overcome refractoriness to both agents. Blood. 2018;131:464-467.
66. Nooka AK, Joseph NS, Kaufman JL, et al. Clinical efﬁcacy of daratumumab, pomalidomide, and dexamethasone in patients with
relapsed or refractory myeloma: utility of re-treatment with daratumumab among refractory patients. Cancer. 2019;125:2991-3000.
67. Harrison S, Cavo M, De La Rubia J, et al. T(11;14) and high BCL2
expression are predictive biomarkers of response to venetoclax in
combination with bortezomib and dexamethasone in patients with
relapsed/refractory multiple myeloma: Biomarker analyses from the
phase 3 Bellini study. Blood. 2019;134:142.
68. Dimopoulos M, Delimpasi S, Simonova M, et al. Weekly selinexor,
bortezomib, and dexamethasone (SVd) versus twice weekly bortezomib and dexamethasone (Vd) in patients with multiple myeloma (MM)
after one to three prior therapies: initial results of the phase III BOSTON study. J Clin Oncol. 2020;38(suppl 15). abstr 8501.
69. Dimopoulos MA, Richardson PG, Moreau P, Anderson KC. Current
treatment landscape for relapsed and/or refractory multiple myeloma.
Nat Rev Clin Oncol. 2015;12:42-54.
70. Gandhi UH, Cornell RF, Lakshman A, et al. Outcomes of patients with
multiple myeloma refractory to CD38-targeted monoclonal antibody
therapy. Leukemia. 2019;33:2266-2275.
71. Dimopoulos MA, Dytfeld D, Grosicki S, et al. Elotuzumab plus pomalidomide and dexamethasone for multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med.
2018;379:1811-1822.
72. Attal M, Richardson PG, Rajkumar SV, et al. Isatuximab plus pomalidomide and low-dose dexamethasone versus pomalidomide and
low-dose dexamethasone in patients with relapsed and refractory
multiple myeloma (ICARIA-MM): a randomised, multicentre, openlabel, phase 3 study. Lancet. 2019;394:2096-2107.

322

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.annonc.2020.11.014

M. A. Dimopoulos et al.
73. Chari A, Suvannasankha A, Fay JW, et al. Daratumumab plus pomalidomide and dexamethasone in relapsed and/or refractory multiple
myeloma. Blood. 2017;130:974-981.
74. Chari A, Vogl DT, Gavriatopoulou M, et al. Oral selinexordexamethasone for triple-class refractory multiple myeloma. N Engl J
Med. 2019;381:727-738.
75. Lonial S, Lee HC, Badros A, et al. Belantamab mafodotin for
relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma (DREAMM-2): a two-arm,
randomised, open-label, phase 2 study. Lancet Oncol. 2020;21:207221.
76. Richardson PG, Bringhen S, Voorhees P, et al. Melﬂufen plus dexamethasone in relapsed and refractory multiple myeloma (O-12-M1): a
multicentre, international, open-label, phase 1-2 study. Lancet Haematol. 2020;7:e395-e407.
77. Raje N, Berdeja J, Lin Y, et al. Anti-BCMA CAR T-cell therapy bb2121 in
relapsed or refractory multiple myeloma. N Engl J Med. 2019;380:
1726-1737.
78. Fernandez de Larrea C, Kyle RA, Durie BG, et al. Plasma cell leukemia:
consensus statement on diagnostic requirements, response criteria
and treatment recommendations by the International Myeloma
Working Group. Leukemia. 2013;27:780-791.
79. Gavriatopoulou M, Musto P, Caers J, et al. European Myeloma Network
recommendations on diagnosis and management of patients with rare
plasma cell dyscrasias. Leukemia. 2018;32:1883-1898.
80. Musto P, Simeon V, Martorelli MC, et al. Lenalidomide and low-dose
dexamethasone for newly diagnosed primary plasma cell leukemia.
Leukemia. 2014;28:222-225.
81. Royer B, Minvielle S, Diouf M, et al. Bortezomib, doxorubicin, cyclophosphamide, dexamethasone induction followed by stem cell transplantation for primary plasma cell leukemia: a prospective phase II
study of the Intergroupe Francophone du Myelome. J Clin Oncol.
2016;34:2125-2132.
82. Van De Donk NWCJ, van der Holt B, Schjesvold FH, et al. Treatment of primary plasma cell leukemia with carﬁlzomib and
lenalidomide-based therapy: results of the ﬁrst interim analysis of
the phase 2 EMN12/HOVON129 study. Blood. 2019;134(suppl_1):
693.
83. Dhakal B, Patel S, Girnius S, et al. Hematopoietic cell transplantation
utilization and outcomes for primary plasma cell leukemia in the current era. Leukemia. 2020;34:3338-3347.
84. Dimopoulos MA, Hamilos G. Solitary bone plasmacytoma and
extramedullary plasmacytoma. Curr Treat Options Oncol. 2002;3:255259.
85. Caers J, Garderet L, Kortum KM, et al. European Myeloma Network
recommendations on tools for the diagnosis and monitoring of multiple myeloma: what to use and when. Haematologica. 2018;103:17721784.
86. Paiva B, Chandia M, Vidriales MB, et al. Multiparameter ﬂow cytometry
for staging of solitary bone plasmacytoma: new criteria for risk of
progression to myeloma. Blood. 2014;124:1300-1303.
87. Dimopoulos MA, Hillengass J, Usmani S, et al. Role of magnetic resonance imaging in the management of patients with multiple myeloma:
a consensus statement. J Clin Oncol. 2015;33:657-664.
88. Tsang RW, Campbell BA, Goda JS, et al. Radiation therapy for solitary
plasmacytoma and multiple myeloma: guidelines from the International Lymphoma Radiation Oncology Group. Int J Radiat Oncol Biol
Phys. 2018;101:794-808.
89. Dykewicz CA, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Infectious
Diseases Society of America, American Society of Blood and Marrow
Transplantation. Summary of the guidelines for preventing opportunistic infections among hematopoietic stem cell transplant recipients.
Clin Infect Dis. 2001;33:139-144 (Adapted from: Gross PA, Barrett TL,
Dellinger EP et al. Purpose of quality standards for infectious diseases.
Clin Infect Dis. 1994;18:421).
90. Alonso R, Cedena MT, Wong S, et al. Prolonged lenalidomide maintenance therapy improves the depth of response in multiple myeloma.
Blood Adv. 2020;4:2163-2171.

Volume 32

-

Issue 3

-

2021

